\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH assemble 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBassemble\fR  --  amalgamate two or more Humdrum files
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBassemble  \fIinputfile1  inputfile2\fR  [\fIinputfile3 ...\fR]  [ > \fIoutputfile\fR]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "assemble"
command allows two or more structurally similar Humdrum files 
to be aligned together -- such as where a full score
is assembled from files containing individual parts.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "assemble"
command is similar to the \s-1UNIX\s+1
paste
command.
If file `A' contains:
.sp 1
.in +2
1
.br
2
.br
3
.in -2
.sp 1
and file `B' contains:
.sp 1
.in +2
A
.br
B
.br
C
.in -2
.sp 1
then the \s-1UNIX\s+1 command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
paste A B
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
will produce the following output:
.sp 1
.in +2
1	A
.br
2	B
.br
3	C
.in -2
.sp 1
The
.B "assemble"
command is a more sophisticated version of
paste
-- suitable for assembling several concurrent spines stored in
different Humdrum files.
The
.B "assemble"
command coordinates and synchronizes comments, interpretations,
and data records from the input files.
Duplicate global comments are avoided.
Corresponding local comments are output where appropriate.
Where one file contains local comments and a second file contains none,
null local comments are inserted as appropriate.
Similarly, null interpretations may also be added as necessary.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "assemble"
command expects that the input files will normally have the 
same number of data records.
These data records are aligned side-by-side.
If the input files do not contain the same number of data records,
then the spines in the shorter file will be terminated with appropriate
spine-path terminators.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "assemble"
command provides only a help option:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The operation of
.B "assemble"
can be illustrated by considering the following two input files.
Both files contain the same number of data records (4).
.sp 1
.sp 1
.B "file1:"
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s s l
l l l l l.
!! A sample file.
**foo		**foo		**foo
!1		!2		!3
X		.		X
X		.		.
*		*v		*v
X		X
\.		X
*-		*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.B "file2:"
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s s s
l s s s s
l l l l l.
!! A sample file.
!! An additional global comment.
**bar	**bar
!4	!5
\.	.
X	X
*v	*v
! joined
X
\.
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
If the
.B "assemble"
command is invoked as:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
assemble file1 file2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
then the corresponding output is:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s s s s
l s s s s s
l l l l l l.
!! A sample file.
!! An additional global comment.
**foo	**foo	**foo	**bar	**bar
!1	!2	!3	!4	!5
X 	.	X	.	.
X	.	.	X	X
* 	*v	*v	*	*
* 	*	*v	*v
!	!	! joined
X	X	X
\.	X	.
*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that both input files begin with the identical global comment;
only one copy of this comment appears in the output.
The second file contains an additional global comment that is also output.
The subsequent local comments have been amalgamated on a single output line.
The spine-path changes in both input files have been properly rendered
by padding null interpretations in the appropriate spines.
The last local comment in
file2
has also been correctly re-positioned.
Finally, each of the four data records have been aligned.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in -2
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcensus\fR (1),
\fBextract\fR (1), \fBhumdrum\fR (1),
\fBpaste\fR (\s-1UNIX\s+1),
\fBtimebase\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "LIMITS"
.in +2
The number of specified input files may be limited on \s-1DOS\s+1 systems.
.in -2
