\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH census 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +12
.ti -12
\fBcensus\fR  --  determine general properties of a Humdrum input
.in -12
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBcensus\fR  [\fB-k\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "census"
command provides a summary of seven gross features of any Humdrum input.
It provides counts of the total number of records (lines),
the number of unique interpretations encountered,
the number of comments, the number of data records,
the number of data tokens, null tokens, and multiple-stops.
.sp 1
.sp 1
When the
.B "-k"
option is invoked,
.B "census"
provides a summary of a further ten features pertaining to \f(CR**kern\fR
inputs.
This summary includes the number of single and double barline records,
the maximum number of concurrent notes, the total number of notes,
the total number of rests, the number of untied notes, as well
as the longest, shortest, highest, and lowest notes encountered.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "census"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-k\fR	also output information regarding \f(CR**kern\fR-related data
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-k"
option pertains to \f(CR**kern\fR inputs only.
This option adds \f(CR**kern\fR-related information to the output.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SAMPLE OUTPUT"
.in +2
The following is a sample output where the
.B "-k"
option has been invoked.
Without the
.B "-k"
option, the \(od\s-1KERN DATA\s+1\(cd would be absent from the output.
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
HUMDRUM DATA
Number of data tokens:	33
Number of null tokens:	9
Number of multiple-stops:	1
Number of data records:	11
Number of interpretations:	2
Number of records:	14

KERN DATA
Number of notes:	8
Number of untied notes:	7
Longest note:	2
Shortest note:	16
Highest note:	cc
Lowest note:	C
Number of rests:	4
Maximum concurrent notes:	2
Number of single barlines:	2
Number of double barlines:	1
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
.in -2
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**kern\fR (2), \fBhumdrum\fR (1), \fBproof\fR (1)
.in -2
