\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH cents 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBcents\fR  --  translate selected Humdrum pitch-related representations to cents
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBcents\fR  [\fB-p \fIn\fR]  [\fB-tx\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [> \fIoutputfile.cnt\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "cents"
command transforms various pitch-related inputs to corresponding
numerical values in hundredths of semitones.
It outputs one or more Humdrum \f(CR**cents\fR
spines containing values corresponding to the cents distance
from middle C for pitch-related input tokens.
Pitches above middle C produce positive output values,
whereas pitches below middle C produce negative output values.
For example, the \f(CR**pitch\fR
token \(odC3\(cd is transformed to -1200 (cents).
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "cents"
command is able to translate any of the pitch-related
representations listed below.
In each case, a tuning standard of A4 equals 440 hertz is assumed.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**cents\fR) refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "cent"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.cnt' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**cents\fR	hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
\f(CR**freq\fR	fundamental frequency (in hertz)
\f(CR**fret\fR	fretted-instrument pitch tablature
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**MIDI\fR	Music Instrument Digital Interface tablature
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	(e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
	(e.g. 12 equals C5)
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**specC\fR	spectral centroid (in hertz)
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBcents\fR."
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "cents"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-p \fIn\fR	output precision of \fIn\fR decimal places
\fB-t\fR	suppresses printing of all but the first note of a group
	of tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes
\fB-x\fR	suppresses printing of non-cents signifiers
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-p"
option can be used to set the precision of the output values to \fIn\fR
decimal places.
The default precision is integer values only (\fIn\fR=0).
Note that
.B "cents"
is able to process \f(CR**cents\fR
as input; this feature allows the user to round-off existing \f(CR**cents\fR
data to a specified precision.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-t"
ensures that only a single output value is given for tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes;
the output coincides with the first note of the tie.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the default operation,
.B "cents"
outputs non-pitch-related signifiers in addition to the cents value.
For example, the \f(CR**pitch\fR token \(odA5zzz\(cd will result in the output
\(od2100zzz\(cd -- that is, after translating A5 to 2100 cents,
the \(odzzz\(cd signifiers are retained in the output.
For some applications, echoing non-pitch-related signifiers in the output
is useful.
However, in other situations, the result can prove confusing --
especially, when the non-pitch-related signifiers are numbers.
Consider the case of the \f(CR**kern\fR token \(od8aa\(cd;
after translating `aa' to 2100 cents, the non-pitch-related signifier `8'
will also be output, hence the value 82100 -- which will undoubtedly cause
confusion.
The
.B "-x"
option is useful for eliminating non-pitch-related signifiers from the output.
For most \f(CR**kern\fR inputs, the
.B "-x"
option is recommended.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the use of
.B "cents."
The input contains six pitch-related spines -- two of which
(\f(CR**deg\fR and \f(CR**cocho\fR) cannot be processed by
.B "cents."
In addition, there is one non-pitch-related spine
(\f(CR**metpos\fR).
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l l
l l l l l l l.
!! `cents' example.
**kern	**pitch	**MIDI	**deg	**metpos	**cocho	**Tonh
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*tb8	*	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
8ee-	G#4foo	/60/bar	1foo	1	r	Gis2
\.	.	/-60/	.	.	.	.
8ff	A3	/62/	2	3	9.89	H2
\.	.	/-62/	.	.	.	.
8dd-	Ab3	/70/	1	2	7.07	B2
\.	.	/-70/	.	.	.	.
8d-	C#4	/61/	6	3	7.135	Cis4
\.	.	/-61/	.	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
[4a-	r	.	5	1	r	r
\.	.	.	7	3	5.5	Heses2
4a-]	D4	/48/ /52/	1	2	8.11
\.	.	/-48/	.	.	.	.
\.	D4 F4	/-52/	2	3	7.33 6.4	C3 Es3
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	G4	.	r	1	r	H2 D3
===	===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Executing the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
cents -tx input > output.cnt
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following result:
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l l
l l l l l l l.
!! `cents' example.
**cents	**cents	**cents	**deg	**metpos	**cocho	**cents
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*tb8	*	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
1500	800	0	1foo	1	r	-1600
\.	.	.	.	.	.	.
1700	-300	200	2	3	9.89	-1300
\.	.	.	.	.	.	.
1300	-400	1000	1	2	7.07	-1400
\.	.	.	.	.	.	.
100	100	100	6	3	7.135	100
\.	.	.	.	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
800	r	.	5	1	r	r
\.	.	.	7	3	5.5	-1500
\.	200	-1200 -800	1	2	8.11	-1200
\.	.	.	.	.	.	.
\.	200 500	.	2	3	7.33 6.4	-1200 -900
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	700	.	r	1	r	-1300 -1000
===	===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Both processed and unprocessed spines are output.
Notice that the tied note at the beginning of measure 2 in the \f(CR**kern\fR
spine has been rendered as a single note rather than as two notes
(due to the
.B "-t"
option).
Also notice that the non-pitch-related signifiers (e.g. foo)
in the first notes of the \f(CR**pitch, **MIDI\fR, and \f(CR**cocho\fR
spines have been stripped away (due to the
.B "-x"
option).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "FILES"
.in +2
The file \f(CRx_option.awk\fR
is used by this program when the
.B "-x"
option is invoked.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**cents\fR (2),
\fB**freq\fR (2), \fBfreq\fR (1),
\fB**fret\fR (2), \fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1),\fR \fB**MIDI\fR (2),
\fBmidi\fR (1),
\fB**pitch\fR (2), \fBpitch\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fBsemits\fR (1),
\fB**solfg\fR (2), \fBsolfg\fR (1), \fB**specC\fR (2) \fBspecC\fR (1),
\fB**Tonh\fR (2), \fBtonh\fR (1)
.in -2
