\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH context 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +13
.ti -13
\fBcontext\fR  --  congeal Humdrum data records to form a contextual frame
.in -13
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBcontext\fR [\fB-b \fIregexp\fR] [\fB-d \fIstring\fR] [\fB-e \fIregexp\fR] [\fB-i \fIregexp\fR] [\fB-n \fIn\fR] [\fB-o \fIregexp\fR] [\fB-p \fIn\fR] [\fIinputfile\fR ...]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "context"
command amalgamates one or more successive input data records into
single records according to user-defined criteria.
Only single-spine Humdrum inputs are permitted.
The
.B "context"
command provides a useful means for amalgamating on a single line
those data tokens that are somehow deemed to be contextually related.
For example,
.B "context"
might be used to link together all pitches in a measure,
or pair the first and last notes of each phrase.
The command is useful in such tasks as partitioning possible pitch-class sets
or grouping arpeggio tones into chords.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In its simplest mode of operation
.B "context"
will join a specified number of successive data records together
to form a single output record.
By way of example, consider a file (named \f(CRinput\fR) consisting of a single
spine whose data records contain the numbers 1 through 6 on separate lines:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l l l.
**numbers
1
2
3
4
5
6
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
The command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
context -n 3 input
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
will produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
**numbers
1 2 3
2 3 4
3 4 5
4 5 6
\.
\.
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that the output file has been padded with null tokens so that
the number of output records matches the number of input records.
By invoking the
.B "-p"
option, the padded null tokens can be placed either at the beginning or the
end of the file, or split between beginning and end.
For example, the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
context -n 3 -p 3 input
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
will place the trailing null tokens in the above example at the beginning
of the output.
The
.B "-p"
option defaults to the value 0.
.sp 1
.sp 1
If null tokens are present in the input, they remain in place,
yet do not affect the congealed data records.
For example, if a null token was present between the
numbers 1 and 2 in the above input, the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
context -n 4 -p 1 input
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would produce an output beginning with a single padded null token:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
**numbers
\.
1 2 3 4
\.
2 3 4 5
3 4 5 6
\.
\.
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Rather than specifying a fixed number of congealed data records,
input records can alternatively be amalgamated according to the
signifiers present in the input data itself.
The
.B "-e"
option allows the user to specify an \(odend\(cd signifier.
When this signifier is encountered in the input,
the input record is appended to the current congealed record
-- which is then output -- and a new congealed output record begins.
End signifiers are defined as string patterns using the
.I "regular expression"
syntax (see \fBregexp (5)\fR).
For example, given an input of six successive numbers, the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
context -e [0246] input
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
**numbers
1 2
\.
3 4
\.
5 6
\.
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "context"
command supports the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-b \fIregexp\fR	begin a new output record starting with token matching
	\fIregexp\fR
\fB-d \fIstring\fR	use \fIstring\fR as output delimiter for input records
	rather than the space character
\fB-e \fIregexp\fR	begin a new output record starting after token matching
	\fIregexp\fR
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-i \fIregexp\fR	ignore any records matching \fIregexp\fR when counting
\fB-n \fIn\fR	amalgamate \fIn\fR input data records for each output record
\fB-o \fIregexp\fR	omit any records matching \fIregexp\fR from amalgamated
	output; do not count
\fB-p \fIn\fR	pad \fIn\fR (normally trailing) null tokens at the beginning of
	the output spine
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
Note that the \fB-b\fR and \fB-e\fR options are mutually exclusive
with the \fB-n\fR, \fB-p\fR, and \fB-i\fR options.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the default operation,
.B "context"
separates amalgamated tokens by inserting a space character.
(Thus the input tokens are treated as subtokens in a Humdrum multiple-stop.)
The
.B "-d"
option allows the user to define an alternative string as the
subtoken delimiter.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-n"
option allows the user to specify the maximum number of data records
assembled into a single output record.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-b"
option allows the user to specify a \(odbegin\(cd marker.
When this marker (\fIregexp\fR) is matched in the input,
any current congealed record is output, and a new congealed
record begins.
Begin signifiers are defined as string patterns using the
.I "regular expression"
syntax.
.sp 1
.sp 1
With the
.B "-e"
option, if
.B "context"
encounters a data record matching
.I "regexp"
then it appends the current input record to the current assembled output
record and begins assembling a new record with the following input record.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-i"
option is used only with
.B "-n;"
it causes any data records matching
.I "regexp"
to be ignored in the counting of amalgamated tokens.
Such \(oduncounted\(cd records are nevertheless output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-o"
option causes data records matching
.I "regexp"
to be omitted from the output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-p"
option may be used in conjunction with \fB-n\fR.
Normally, the output from
.B "context -n"
is padded with trailing null tokens -- one fewer in number than
the value specified with \fB-n\fR.
The \fB-p \fIn\fR option causes \fIn\fR null tokens to be padded at the
.I "beginning"
of the output spine, rather than trailing at the end.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that tandem interpretations and comments are processed like null tokens;
they are merely echoed in the output in their appropriate position.
Note also that
.B "context"
automatically breaks a congealed output record whenever
it encounters a spine-path terminator or exclusive interpretation
in the input.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following excerpt from Edgar Var\o'e\(ga'se's
.I "Density 21.5 (1936)"
illustrates the use of
.B "context."
Consider the initial input:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
!! Edgar Var\o'e\(ga'se, Density 21.5 (1936)
!! excerpt: mm.41-45
**kern
*MM72
\(eq41
(16f#
16e#
[8gn
2.g_
\(eq42
4g])
4r
4r
8r
(16f#
16e#
\(eq43
6gn)
(6e#
6f#
8g)
(8f#
12e#
12g
12dn
\(eq44
2a-)
(4an
8een
[8bb-
\(eq45
4bb-]
2.ccc#)
\(eq45
8r
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
A simple transformation would be to amalgamate successive data
records in overlapping groups of 3.
The following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
context -n 3 density
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
!! Edgar Var\o'e\(ga'se, Density 21.5 (1936)
!! excerpt: mm.41-45
**kern
*MM72
\(eq41 (16f# 16e#
(16f# 16e# [8gn
16e# [8gn 2.g_
[8gn 2.g_ \(eq42
2.g_ \(eq42 4g])
\(eq42 4g]) 4r
4g]) 4r 4r
4r 4r 8r
4r 8r (16f#
8r (16f# 16e#
(16f# 16e# \(eq43
16e# \(eq43 6gn)
\(eq43 6gn) (6e#
6gn) (6e# 6f#
(6e# 6f# 8g)
6f# 8g) (8f#
8g) (8f# 12e#
(8f# 12e# 12g
12e# 12g 12dn
12g 12dn \(eq44
12dn \(eq44 2a-)
\(eq44 2a-) (4an
2a-) (4an 8een
(4an 8een [8bb-
8een [8bb- \(eq45
[8bb- \(eq45 4bb-]
\(eq45 4bb-] 2.ccc#)
4bb-] 2.ccc#) \(eq45
2.ccc#) \(eq45 8r
\.
\.
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice once again that the input and output have the same number of records.
Preserving the structure in this way allows the user to
coordinate the contextual output with the original input using the
.B "assemble"
command.
.sp 1
.sp 1
A more useful transformation might amalgamate successive data
records in overlapping groups of 3
.I "notes;"
that is rests and barlines should be ignored.
The following command causes input records containing either an equals-sign
or the letter `r' to be ignored when counting the number of amalgamated
data records:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
context -n 3 -i [=r] density
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The input and corresponding output are given in the left
and right spines below:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l s
l l.
!! Edgar Var\o'e\(ga'se, Density 21.5 (1936)
!! excerpt: mm.41-45
**kern	**kern
*MM72	*MM72
\(eq41	\(eq41 (16f# 16e# [8gn
(16f#	(16f# 16e# [8gn
16e#	16e# [8gn 2.g_
[8gn	[8gn 2.g_ \(eq42 4g])
2.g_	2.g_ \(eq42 4g]) 4r 4r 8r (16f#
\(eq42	\(eq42 4g]) 4r 4r 8r (16f# 16e#
4g])	4g]) 4r 4r 8r (16f# 16e#
4r	4r 4r 8r (16f# 16e# \(eq43 6gn)
4r	4r 8r (16f# 16e# \(eq43 6gn)
8r	8r (16f# 16e# \(eq43 6gn)
(16f#	(16f# 16e# \(eq43 6gn)
16e#	16e# \(eq43 6gn) (6e#
\(eq43	\(eq43 6gn) (6e# 6f#
6gn)	6gn) (6e# 6f#
(6e#	(6e# 6f# 8g)
6f#	6f# 8g) (8f#
8g)	8g) (8f# 12e#
(8f#	(8f# 12e# 12g
12e#	12e# 12g 12dn
12g	12g 12dn \(eq44 2a-)
12dn	12dn \(eq44 2a-) (4an
\(eq44	\(eq44 2a-) (4an 8een
2a-)	2a-) (4an 8een
(4an	(4an 8een [8bb-
8een	8een [8bb- \(eq45 4bb-]
[8bb-	[8bb- \(eq45 4bb-] 2.ccc#)
\(eq45	.
4bb-]	.
2.ccc#)	.
\(eq45	.
8r	.
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that as the end of the file is approached,
.B "context"
will continue amalgamating data records until it
is no longer able to satisfy the amalgamating criteria.
If unable to complete an output record,
.B "context"
will output a null token.
.sp 1
.sp 1
If the above command had used the
.B "-o"
rather than the
.B "-i"
option, all of the rests and barlines would have been omitted
from the output.
Otherwise, the output would be the same as given above.
.sp 1
.sp 1
A more musically useful partitioning of Var\o'e\(ga'se's
work might be based on slur markings.
The following command uses open- and closed-slur markings
to demarcate the contextual outputs;
(note the need to escape the parentheses since they are regular expression
metacharacters).
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
context -b '\\(' -e '\\)' -o '[=r]' density
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
Notice that the ensuing output (shown below) pads the output with
null tokens in order to maintain the same
number of data records as the original input.
(An output such as the following might be used as input to
a command sequence such as \fBpc -x | pcset\fR).
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
!! Edgar Var\o'e\(ga'se, Density 21.5 (1936)
!! excerpt: mm.41-45
**kern
*MM72
\.
(16f# 16e# [8gn 2.g_ 4g])
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
(16f# 16e# 6gn)
\.
\.
\.
(6e# 6f# 8g)
\.
\.
(8f# 12e# 12g 12dn 2a-)
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
(4an 8een [8bb- 4bb-] 2.ccc#)
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
\.
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
If there were any notes not embraced within a slur,
the above command would have caused them to be output on
their own line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcontext\fR (1), \fBgrep\fR (\s-1UNIX\s+1),
\fBnf\fR (1), \fBpatt\fR (1),
\fBpattern\fR (1), \fBpcset\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "WARNINGS"
.in +2
The \fB-b\fR and \fB-e\fR options are mutually exclusive
with the \fB-n\fR, \fB-p\fR, and \fB-i\fR options.
.in -2
