\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH extract 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBextract\fR  --  get specified spines from a Humdrum input
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBextract\fR  \fB-f  \fIfield1,field2,...,$-1,$\fR  [\fIinputfile  ...\fR]
.ti -7
\fBextract\fR  \fB-i  \fIinterp1,interp2,...,interp\fRn  [\fIinputfile  ...\fR]
.ti -7
\fBextract\fR  \fB-p  \fIspine#\fRn  [\fIinputfile  ...\fR]
.ti -7
\fBextract\fR  \fB-t  \fIfield_trace_file.ftf\fR  [\fIinputfile  ...\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "extract"
command allows the user to select one or more spines from a Humdrum input.
The command is typically used to extract parts (such as a tuba part)
from some multi-part score; however
.B "extract"
can be used to isolate dynamic markings, musical lyrics, or any other
stream of information
that has been encoded as a separate Humdrum spine.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "extract" 
command has four distinct modes of operation:  (1) field mode
.B "(-f),"
(2) interpretation mode
.B "(-i),"
(3) spine-path mode
.B "(-p),"
and (4) field-trace mode
.B "(-t)."
The simplest mode is field mode;
the most general-purpose mode is field-trace mode.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In 
.I "field mode,"
the 
.B "extract" 
command operates in a manner similar to the \s-1UNIX\s+1
cut
command.
The user may specify a given field (data column) or set of fields to
be selected from the input stream. 
For example, the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -f 1,3,8
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
will extract the first, third, and eighth spines from the input stream.
In field mode, field specifications may also be made
with respect to the right-most field.
For example, the expression
"$"
refers to the right-most field in the input;
the arithmetic expression
"$-1"
refers to the right-most field minus one, etc.
By way of example, the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -f '2,4-6,$' lassus
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
will extract the second, fourth, fifth, sixth, and last (right-most)
spines in the file \(odlassus.\(cd
The
extract -f
command differs from the \s-1UNIX\s+1
cut
command in that Humdrum global comments are properly preserved
in the output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In 
.I "interpretation mode,"
the 
.B "extract"
command outputs all spines containing the
interpretation(s) specified by the user.
By way of example, the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -i '**semits,**MIDI' hildegard
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
will extract all spines in the file \f(CRhildegard\fR
containing \f(CR**semits\fR or \f(CR**MIDI\fR data.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In 
.I "spine-path mode,"
the
.B "extract" 
command follows a given spine starting at the beginning of the file,
and traces the course of that spine throughout the input stream.
If spine-path changes are encountered in the input
(such as spine-exchanges, spine-merges, or spine-splits)
the output adapts accordingly.
By way of example, if the \(odthird\(cd spine is selected,
the output consists of the third spine and follows the path of that spine
through the input until it is terminated or the end-of-file is encountered.
What begins as the third column, may end up as
some other column (or columns) in the input.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the 
.I "field-trace mode,"
the 
.B "extract"
command accepts a list of spine-column
positions over the course of the file.
In the 
.I "field-trace"
mode, the user provides a file containing a list
specifying the precise selection of spines through the file
at various line numbers.
The first column in this list specifies the line (record) number
at which the field selection is defined.
The second column lists the spine or spines to be
extracted beginning at the specified line.
For example, the following
.I "field-trace file"
specifies that the first spine
from line 1 should be output; beginning at line 2, spines 3, 4, and 5
should be output; beginning at line 18, spines 1 and 4 should be output,
and from line 78 to the end of the input, spine 9 should be output.
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
1	1
2	3-5
18	1,4
78	9
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
The
.I "field-trace"
mode allows the user to select virtually any combination of data tokens
from the input stream.
Note that using the
.I "field-trace"
mode may produce output that no longer conforms to the Humdrum syntax.
(See EXAMPLES below.)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "extract"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-f  \fIfieldlist\fR	select field mode
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the
	command syntax
\fB-i  \fIinterplist\fR	select interpretation mode
\fB-p  \fIspine#\fR	select spine-path mode
\fB-t  \fIfieldtrace file\fR	select field-trace mode
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
A \fIfieldlist\fR consists of any set of integers separated by commas,
or a range specification in which the lower and upper values are
separated by a dash: e.g.\f(CR1,4-8,13\fR.
With the exception of range specifications, the order of the integers
in the list is unimportant, hence \f(CR13,1,4-8\fR
is equivalent to \f(CR1,4-8,13\fR.
The right-field anchor ($) can be used only with the
.B "-f"
option.
.sp 1
.sp 1
An \fIinterplist\fR consists of any set of tandem or exclusive
interpretations separated by commas, e.g.\f(CR'**kern,*C:'\fR
Option arguments may require the use of quotation marks in order to prevent
inadvertent expansion of shell metacharacter (*, ?, etc.).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following examples illustrate how
.B "extract"
may be used.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -f '1,3,$' holst
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
outputs the first, third, and last columns from the file \f(CRholst\fR.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -p 4 mossolov
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
outputs the spine
.I "beginning"
(but not necessarily continuing) in the fourth
column of the file \f(CRmossolov\fR.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -t sibelius.fld sibelius
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
outputs the spines specified in the file \f(CRsibelius.fld\fR for 
the file \f(CRsibelius\fR.
(See \s-1SAMPLE OUTPUTS\s+1 below.)
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -i '*F:,*f:' hendrix
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
outputs all spines that contain the tandem interpretations *F: or *f:
(i.e. in the keys of F major or F minor).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SAMPLE OUTPUTS"
.in +2
The following examples illustrate the various
.B "extract"
options.
Consider the following input file, dubbed \f(CRinput1\fR:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l
l l l l l.
!! `extract' example #1
**ABC	**xyz	**123	**ABC	**foo
A	x	1	a	bar
B	y	2	b	.
C	z	3	c	#
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Executing either of the following commands:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -f '1,3,$-1' input1 > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
or
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -i '**ABC,**123' input1 > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would produce the following result:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s
l l l.
!! `extract' example #1
**ABC	**123	**ABC
A	1	a
B	2	b
C	3	c
*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Consider next the following sample input -- dubbed \f(CRinput2\fR:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `extract' example #2
**ABC	**xyz	**123	**ABC	**foo
A	x	1	a	%
*	*	*^	*	*
B	y	2a	2b	b	&
C	z	3a	3b	c	#
*	*x	*x	*	*	*
A	4a	xyz	4b	d	%
*-	*	*	*	*-	*
5a	xyz	5b	&
*	*x	*x	*
6a	6b	xyz	#
*v	*v	*	*
7	xyz	%
8	xyz	&
*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Executing the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -p 3 input2 > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would produce the following result:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l
l l l l.
!! `extract' example #2
**123
1
*^
2a	2b
3a	3b
*x	*
4a	4b
*	*
5a	5b
*	*x
6a	6b
*v	*v
7
8
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that this output no longer conforms to the Humdrum syntax.
(Output lines 7 and 11 contain only a single exchange-path interpretation.)
.sp 1
.sp 1
For the `example #2' input file, the field-structure is as follows:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
1	1-1	# Line 1 must appear in the file.
4	1-5	# *     *     *^     *     * ....
5	1-6	# Line after path indicator record
7	1-6	# *     *x     *x     *      ....
8	1-6	# Line after path indicator record
9	1-6	# *-     *     *     *     * ....
10	1-4	# Line after path indicator record
11	1-4	# *     *x     *x     *      ....
12	1-4	# Line after path indicator record
13	1-4	# *v     *v     *     *      ....
14	1-3	# Line after path indicator record
16	1-3	# *-     *-     *-           ....
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
(The above file may be generated via the
fields -s
command.)
On the basis of this information a user might create the following
field-trace file, dubbed \f(CRtrace\fR:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
1	1
4	3
5	3,5
7	2,3
8	3,2
9	1,3
10	4
14	3
15	2
16	1
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Executing the following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
extract -t trace input2 > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would produce the following result:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l l.
!! `extract' example #2
**ABC
A
*^
2a	b
3a	c
*x	*x
4a	xyz
*-	*
&
*
#
*
%
xyz
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that in this case, data tokens have been selected
from a variety of input spines.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
.in +2
In
.I "field-trace"
mode, if the specified field-structure does not correspond
to the actual input file, then an \s-1ERROR\s+1 message is issued.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "WARNINGS"
.in +2
Note that only the
.I "field"
mode
.B "(-f)"
guarantees that the output will conform to the Humdrum syntax.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In 
.I "interpretation"
mode, tandem interpretations may be specified in the command
invocation, but mutually exclusive tandem interpretations
(such as changes of key) will not force the program to stop
outputting a specified spine.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBassemble\fR (1), \fBcut\fR (\s-1UNIX\s+1), \fBfields\fR (1), \fByank\fR (1)
.in -2
