\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH fields 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBfields\fR  --  list spine/field structure of a Humdrum file
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBfields\fR  [\fB-gils\fR]  [\fB-r \fIregexp\fR]  [\fIinputfile ...\fR]  [ \fB> \fIoutputfile.ftf\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "fields"
command works in conjunction with the
.B "-t"
option of the
.B "extract"
command to permit highly selective extraction of data from a Humdrum file.
This command is used only rarely; it is invoked when the more usual options of
.B "extract"
fail to provide sufficient flexibility in isolating certain Humdrum data.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "fields"
command outputs a so-called \(odfield-trace file\(cd for a given Humdrum input.
This file can be edited by the user and then used with the
.B "extract"
command to select data from the original input file.
For repetitive tasks, the field-trace file is more convenient than
manual editing of the input file.
.sp 1
.sp 1
When invoking the
.B "fields"
command, the user specifies the types of records to be used as reference
points in the editing task.
The command then produces a listing of record numbers as well as the
corresponding number of fields for each record of the specified type.
For example, the user may wish to use spine-path changes as reference
points for editing an input.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Each output record from the
.B "fields"
command consists of three pieces of information, such as illustrated below:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
13      1-10      # {(4.g#  4.b  ...
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The first field consists of a single number identifying the corresponding
line number of the input file.
The second field consists of two numbers separated by a dash.
The second number indicates the number of currently active spines.
The number prior to the dash is always 1 (see below).
The third field is a comment beginning with the octothorpe (#) and
continuing with the first ten characters of the corresponding line
from the input file.
The purpose of this comment information is to help orient the user when
editing a field-trace file.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Field-trace information can be requested by record-type:
.B "-g"
for global comments,
.B "-l"
for local comments,
.B "-i"
for exclusive and tandem interpretations, and
.B "-s"
for spine-path indicators.
More than one record-type can be requested.
For example, when the
.B "-gl"
options are invoked, the
.B "fields"
command will produce an output line each time a local or global comment
is encountered in the input.
The line number and number of fields will be given in the output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
For global comments, the number of fields output for the current
line is equal to the number of fields for the most recent non-global
comment record.
For spine-path records, the current record as well as the next
record are output so that the user knows the changes in the number of spines. 
.sp 1
.sp 1
A
.B "-r"
option permits the user to specify a
.I "regular expression;"
field-trace data is output for each record matching the specified
regular expression.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that when an unedited field-trace file is used in conjunction with
.B "extract -t,"
the output is identical to the input.
By modifying the field-range (second column in the output), the
user can select which specific fields will be output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "fields"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.ftf' extension.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "fields"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-g\fR	identify lines with global comments
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-i\fR	identify any interpretation record
\fB-l\fR	identify lines with local commens
\fB-r \fIregexp\fR	identify all lines matching \fIregexp\fR
\fB-s\fR	identify lines with spine-path indicators
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SAMPLE OUTPUTS"
.in +2
Consider by way of illustration the following input file:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l
l l l l.
!! `fields' example
**numbers	**alpha	**symbols
*	*betics	*
14	abc	%@
!some	!local	!comments
3	.	#&
*-	*	*
jkl	$+
.T&
l s s l
l l l l.
!! a global comment
*^	*
uvw	xyz	&%
*	*+	*
*	*	**numbers	*
mno	pqr	87	{^}
*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
With the
.B "-g"
option, the fields command will produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
1	1-1	# Line 1 must appear in the file.
9	1-2	# !! a globa ....
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
With the
.B "-l"
option, the fields command will produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
1	1-1	# Line 1 must appear in the file.
5	1-3	# !some    !loc ....
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
With the
.B "-s"
option, the fields command will produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
1	1-1	# Line 1 must appear in the file.
7	1-3	# *-   *    * ....
8	1-2	# Line after path indicator record
10	1-2	# *^   * ....
11	1-3	# Line after path indicator record
12	1-3	# *    *+   * ....
13	1-4	# Line after path indicator record
15	1-4	# *-   *-   *-   * ....
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
With the
.B "-i"
option, the fields command will produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
1	1-1	# Line 1 must appear in the file.
2	1-3	# **numbers   ....
3	1-3	# *    *betics    ....
7	1-3	# *-   *    * ....
8	1-2	# Line after path indicator record
10	1-2	# *^   * ....
11	1-3	# Line after path indicator record
12	1-3	# *    *+   * ....
13	1-4	# *    *    **numb ....
15	1-4	# *-   *-   *-   * ....
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Using the
.B "-r"
option we can specify a regular expression on which record information
cues.
Executing the following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
fields -r '[0-9]' input
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
1	1-1	# Line 1 must appear in the file.
4	1-3	# 14   abc   %@ ....
6	1-3	# 3    .     #& ....
14	1-4	# mno  pqr   87 ....
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that only those records containing numerical data tokens
have been listed.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBextract\fR (1),
\fBregexp\fR (1)
.in -2
