\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH fill 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBfill\fR   --  replace Humdrum null tokens with previous data token
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBfill\fR  [\fB-c \fIchars\fR]   [\fB-p\fR]  [\fB-s \fIregexp\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "fill"
replaces Humdrum null tokens
with the previous non-null data token in the same spine.
Various options modify this basic behavior.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Humdrum null-tokens are place-holders that do not themselves encode data.
Null-tokens consist of a single period character (\(od.\(cd)
-- separated from other tokens by tabs, or appearing on a line by itself.
The
.B "fill"
command replaces occurrences of null-tokens with the most recent
non-null data occurring in the same spine.
When the
.B "-p"
option is invoked, the replacement data tokens are enclosed in
parentheses ( ).
If the initial data tokens in a spine are null-tokens, then null-tokens
are output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In repeating previous data tokens, if the
.B "-s"
option is invoked,
.B "fill"
skips over any data records matching \fIregexp.\fR
For example, if \fIregexp\fR is the equals-sign
(the \(odcommon system\(cd barline),
then barline data tokens will not be repeated in subsequent data records
containing null tokens.
Thus, if a data token `X' is followed by a token that matches
the regular expression /=/, then subsequent null-tokens
will be replaced by the token `X' rather than by the equals sign.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "fill"
command correctly handles spine path changes.
In the case where two or more spines join together,
.B "fill"
outputs a multiple-stop where necessary.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "fill"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-c \fIchars\fR	repeats only characters listed in \fIchars\fR
\fB-p\fR	place repeated data tokens in parentheses
\fB-s \fIregexp\fR	skip data records matching \fIregexp\fR
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following inputs and outputs illustrate the operation of the
.B "fill"
command.
Consider the following input:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l l.
!! Example 1
**kern	**kern
16e-	8r
16d	.
16e-	8gg
16f	.
16g	8cc
16f	.
16g	8gg
16e-	.
16a	[2aa
16g	.
16a	.
16b-	.
16cc	.
16b-	.
16cc	.
16a	.
\(eq78	\(eq78
\.	.
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Invoking the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
fill input > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l l.
!! Example 1
**kern	**kern
16e-	8r
16d	8r
16e-	8gg
16f	8gg
16g	8cc
16f	8cc
16g	8gg
16e-	8gg
16a	[2aa
16g	[2aa
16a	[2aa
16b-	[2aa
16cc	[2aa
16b-	[2aa
16cc	[2aa
16a	[2aa
\(eq78	\(eq78
\(eq78	\(eq78
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that all of the null tokens have been replaced by the preceding
data token in the same spine.
Notice also that the barline for measure 78 has been repeated.
For many applications repeating of barlines will be inappropriate.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The following, more complex example, illustrates the use of the
.B "-p"
and
.B "-s"
options.
The input is shown on the left and the corresponding output is
shown on the right.
The output was produced by invoking the following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
fill -p -s ^= input > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
c s s l l l c s s
l s s l l l l s s
l l l l l l l l l.
\fBINPUT\f(CR				\fBOUTPUT\f(CR
!! Example 2				!! Example 2
**foo	**foo	**bar				**foo	**foo	**bar
a	xyz	. 				a	xyz	.
\.	23	(%&)				(a)	23	(%&)
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2				\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
\.	.	. 				(a)	(23)	((%&))
.T&
l s s l l l l s s
l l l l l l l l l.
!! A comment.				!! A comment.
\.	.	49				(a)	(23)	49
*x	*	*x				*x	*	*x
\.	.	. 				(49)	(23)	(a)
*	*v	*v				*	*v	*v
\.	. 					(49)	(23 a)
abc	XYZ					abc	XYZ
*	*^					*	*^
\.	.	. 				(abc)	(XYZ)	(XYZ)
\.	1a	2b				(abc)	1a	2b
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3				\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
*-	*	*				*-	*	*
\.	. 					(1a)	(2b)
====	====					====	====
*+	*					*+	*
**foo	**foo	**bar				**foo	**foo	**bar
\.	.	. 				(1a)	.	(2b)
*-	*-	*-				*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
In order to avoid repeating the barlines, the skip option has been
invoked with the regular expression "^=" -- meaning any equals sign
at the beginning of a line.
(See \fBregexp\fR in Section 6 of this manual for details concerning
regular expression syntax.)
In addition, the
.B "-p"
option has been invoked so that all repeated tokens are placed in parentheses.
Notice that
.B "fill"
adapts to changing spine-paths.
Note especially the join-spine (*v) interpretations leading to the
double-stop:\f(CR(23 a)\fR.
.sp 1
.sp 1
A final example illustrates the use of the
.B "-c"
option.
Once again, the input is shown on the left and the corresponding output
is shown on the right.
The output was produced by invoking the following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
fill -c '[a-gA-G#-]' input > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
c s l l l l l c s
l l l l l l l l l.
\fBINPUT\fR						\fBOUTPUT\fR
**kern	**kern						**kern	**kern
(4g	8b						(4g	8b
\.	8cc						g	8cc
8f#	4dd						8f#	4dd
4.g)	.						4g)	dd
\.	8cc						g	8cc
\.	8b						g	8b
4d	4a						4d	4a
\.	.						d	a
*-	*-						*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
The effect of this command has been to propagate the \f(CR**kern\fR
pitch signifiers, without propagating non-pitch information.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBpatt\fR (1), \fBpattern\fR (1),
\fBregexp\fR (1), \fBsimil\fR (1)
.in -2
