\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH freq 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +10
.ti -10
\fBfreq\fR  --  translate selected Humdrum pitch-related representations to frequency
.in -10
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBfreq\fR  [\fB-p \fIn\fR]  [\fB-tx\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [> \fIoutputfile.frq\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "freq"
command transforms various pitch-related inputs to corresponding
frequency representations.
It outputs one or more Humdrum \f(CR**freq\fR
spines containing numerical values (in hertz) corresponding to the
fundamental frequency for pitch-related input tokens.
For example, the \f(CR**pitch\fR
token \(odC4\(cd is transformed to 261.63 (hertz).
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "freq"
command is able to translate any of the pitch-related
representations listed below.
In each case, a tuning standard of A4 equals 440 hertz is assumed.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**freq\fR)
refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "freq"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.frq' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**cbr\fR	critical band rate (in equivalent rectangular
	bandwidth units)
\f(CR**cents\fR	hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
	(e.g. 1200 equals C5)
\f(CR**cocho\fR	cochlear coordinates (in millimeters)
\f(CR**freq\fR	fundamental frequency (in hertz)
\f(CR**fret\fR	fretted-instrument pitch tablature
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**MIDI\fR	Music Instrument Digital Interface tablature
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	(e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
	(e.g. -12 equals C3)
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**specC\fR	spectral centroid (in hertz)
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBfreq\fR."
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "freq"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-p \fIn\fR	output precision of \fIn\fR decimal places
\fB-t\fR	suppresses printing of all but the first note of a
	group of tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes
\fB-x\fR	suppresses printing of non-frequency signifiers
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-p"
option can be used to set the precision of the output values to \fIn\fR
decimal places.
The default precision is two decimal places.
Note that
.B "freq"
is able to process \f(CR**freq\fR
as input; this feature allows the user to round-off existing \f(CR**freq\fR
data to a specified precision.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-t"
option ensures that only a single output value is given for tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes;
the output coincides with the first note of the tie.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the default operation,
.B "freq"
outputs non-pitch-related signifiers in addition to the frequency value.
For example, the \f(CR**pitch\fR
token \(odA6zzz\(cd will result in the output
\(od1760.00zzz\(cd -- that is, after translating A6 to 1760.00 hertz,
the \(odzzz\(cd signifiers are retained in the output.
For some applications, echoing non-pitch-related signifiers in the output
is useful.
However, in other situations, the result can prove confusing --
especially, when the non-pitch-related signifiers are numbers.
Consider the case of the \f(CR**kern\fR token \(od8aaa\(cd;
after translating `aaa' to 1760.00 hertz, the non-pitch-related signifier `8'
will also be output, hence the value 81760.00 -- which will undoubtedly cause
confusion.
The
.B "-x"
option is useful for eliminating non-pitch-related signifiers from the output.
For most \f(CR**kern\fR inputs, the
.B "-x"
option is recommended.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the use of
.B "freq."
The input contains six pitch-related spines -- one of which (\f(CR**deg\fR)
cannot be processed by
.B "freq."
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `freq' example.
**kern	**pitch	**MIDI	**deg	**cocho	**Tonh
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
8ee-	G#4foo	/60/bar	1foo	r	Gis2
\.	.	/-60/	.	.	.
8ff	A3	/62/	2	9.89	H2
\.	.	/-62/	.	.	.
8dd-	Ab3	/70/	1	7.07	B2
\.	.	/-70/	.	.	.
8d-	C#4	/61/	6	7.135	Cis4
\.	.	/-61/	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
[4a-	r	.	5	r	r
\.	.	.	7	5.5	Heses2
4a-]	D4	/48/ /52/	1	8.11	C3
\.	.	/-48/	.	.	.
\.	D4 F4	/-52/	2	7.33 6.4	C3 Es3
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	G4	.	r	r	H2 D3
===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Executing the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
freq -tx input > output.frq
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following result:
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `freq' example.
**freq	**freq	**freq	**deg	**freq	**freq
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
622.25	415.30	261.63	1foo	r	103.83
\.	.	.	.	.	.
698.46	220.00	293.66	2	481.97	123.47
\.	.	.	.	.	.
554.37	207.65	466.16	1	273.21	116.54
\.	.	.	.	.	.
277.18	277.18	277.18	6	277.16	277.18
\.	.	.	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
415.30	r	.	5	r	r
\.	.	.	7	187.76	110.00
\.	293.66	130.81 164.81	1	340.92	130.81
\.	.	.	.	.	.
\.	293.66 349.23	.	2	289.24 234.47	130.81 155.56
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	392.00	.	r	r	123.47 146.83
===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Both processed and unprocessed spines are output.
Notice that the tied note at the beginning of measure 2 in the \f(CR**kern\fR
spine has been rendered as a single note rather than as two notes
(due to the
.B "-t"
option).
Also notice that the non-pitch-related signifiers (e.g. foo)
in the first notes of the \f(CR**pitch, **MIDI\fR, and \f(CR**cocho\fR
spines have been stripped away (due to the
.B "-x"
option).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "FILES"
.in +2
The file \f(CRx_option.awk\fR
is used by this program when the
.B "-x"
option is invoked.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**cbr\fR (2), \fBcbr\fR (1),
\fB**cents\fR (2), \fBcents\fR (1), \fB**cocho\fR (2), \fBcocho\fR (1),
\fB**freq\fR (2),
.br
\fB**fret\fR (2), \fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1),
\fB**MIDI\fR (2), \fBmidi\fR (1),
\fB**pitch\fR (2), \fBpitch\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fBsemits\fR (1),
\fB**solfg\fR (2), \fBsolfg\fR (1), \fB**specC\fR (2) \fBspecC\fR (1),
\fB**Tonh\fR (2), \fBtonh\fR (1)
.in -2
