\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH iv 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +8
.ti -8
\fBiv\fR  --  determine interval-class vectors for successive vertical sonorities for Humdrum inputs
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBiv\fR  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [> \fIoutputfile.iv\fR]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "iv"
command is used to determine the
.I "interval vector"
for any of five set-theory related inputs:
pitch (\f(CR**semits\fR), pitch-class (\f(CR**pc\fR),
normal form (\f(CR**nf\fR), prime form (\f(CR**pf\fR),
or Fortean set name (\f(CR**pcset\fR).
An interval vector is a six-element numerical list that indicates
the abundance of various interval-classes (from 1 semitone
to 6 semitones) for some pitch-class set.
See \s-1REFERENCES\s+1 below.
.sp 1
.sp 1
When provided with \f(CR**semits\fR or \f(CR**pc\fR inputs,
.B "iv"
treats each input record as a set of pitches.
Unisons and other pitch-class duplications have no effect on the output.
Rests within a set of pitches are ignored;
where an input record consists solely of one or more
rests, a null-token is output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "iv"
command is able to translate any of the representations listed below.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**iv\fR) refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "iv"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.iv' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**iv\fR	interval vector representation
\f(CR**nf\fR	normal form representation
\f(CR**pc\fR	pitch-class representation
\f(CR**pcset\fR	Fortean pitch-class set name
\f(CR**pf\fR	prime form representation
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 12 = C5)
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBiv\fR."
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "iv"
command provides only a help option:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following command outputs the interval vectors for
successive sonorities in the input file \f(CRopus24\fR.
The input may be pitches, pitch-classes, normal forms, Fortean set names, etc.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
iv opus24 > opus24.iv
.in -2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcontext\fR (1), \fB**iv\fR (2),
\fB**nf\fR (2), \fBnf\fR (1),
\fB**pc\fR (2), \fBpc\fR (1),
\fB**pcset\fR (2), \fBpcset\fR (1),
\fB**pf\fR (2), \fBpf\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fBsemits\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "NOTE"
.in +2
The
.B "iv"
command is a shell script that invokes
\f(CRpcset -v\fR.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "REFERENCES"
.in +2
Allen Forte,
.I "The Structure of Atonal Music."
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973.
.sp 1
.sp 1
John Rahn,
.I "Basic Atonal Theory."
New York: Longman Inc., 1980.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Straus, J.
.I "Introduction to Post-Tonal Theory."
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1990.
.in -2
