\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH key 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
\fBkey\fR  --  estimate the key for a Humdrum passage
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBkey\fR  [\fB-af\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "key"
command estimates the key of a given musical passage using
Krumhansl's tonal hiearchy method.
The command is restricted to identifying only those keys within
the common major/minor tonal system.
Modes outside the major/minor system are not recognized.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The input may be either
**semits
or
**kern
representations.
The program adapts to input having varying
numbers spines each with a different interpretation.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The non-optional output consists of three items of information:
.AL
.LI
the
.I "estimated key"
for the passage,
.LI
a
.I "coefficient of correlation"
(Pearson's \(odr\(cd) that measures how well the pitch organization of the
musical passage conforms to an idealized major or minor key template, and
.LI
a
.I "confidence score"
that indicates how distinctive the key-match is compared with other
competing keys.
A confidence score of 100% indicates a very strong confidence in the
key estimate;
low confidence scores indicate that there is at least one other key that
is a good alternative candidate.
.LE
.sp 1
.sp 1
The algorithm is based on Krumhansl's perceptually-based key-finding method
(see reference).
This method compares a given pitch-class
frequency profile with two perceptually-determined prototypes
(one each for major and minor modes).
The coefficients used for these prototypes are those
determined by Krumhansl & Kessler (1982).
In order for the algorithm to work properly, durational information
ought to be provided.
When using
**semits
format input, best results are achieved when
the input has a
.I "time-base"
format.
(See the
.B "timebase (1)"
command.)
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "key"
command is poor at distinguishing less common enharmonic keys.
For example, it is unable to distinguish the following enharmonic spellings
for tonic pitches: C-flat, B-sharp, E-sharp, F-flat.
Also,
.B "key"
is unable to distinguish enharmonic spellings involving
double- or triple- sharps or flats.
That is, G double-sharp major is identified as A major.
KEY is able to distinguish the
more common enharmonic spellings (such as E-flat versus D-sharp).
.sp 1
.sp 1
There is no special output file-type designation.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "key"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-a\fR	output correlation values for all keys
\fB-f\fR	output frequencies for all pitch-classes
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-a"
option will show all of the correlation coefficients
for all 24 of the (enharmonic) major and minor keys.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-f"
option will output the relative frequencies for each of
the twelve chromatic pitch classes (in quarter-note durations).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SAMPLE OUTPUT"
.in +2
Without any options, typical outputs are of the following form:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
Estimated key: B minor (r=0.8442)  confidence: 51.3%
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
With both the
.B "-f"
and
.B "-a"
options invoked, a typical output is given below.
The
.B "-f"
option causes 12 pitch-class tallies to be outputted.
These values are given in acculumated whole-note durations.
For example, the output: \(odPC[5]: 4.25\(cd means that the
enharmonic pitch-class \(odF\(cd appears in the passage for the
equivalent of 4 whole-notes plus a quarter-note duration.
If inputs do not include durational information (such as in
**semits
input), each note is assigned the nominal duration of a quarter-note.
.in +2
PC[0]: 5.50617
.br
PC[1]: 0.375
.br
PC[2]: 6.1875
.br
PC[3]: 0
.br
PC[4]: 5.625
.br
PC[5]: 4.25
.br
PC[6]: 1.25
.br
PC[7]: 5.6875
.br
PC[8]: 0.5
.br
PC[9]: 4.625
.br
PC[10]: 0.625
.br
PC[11]: 4.40625
.br
Tonic[0]  major  0.791744     minor  0.0962456
.br
Tonic[1]  major -0.747033     minor -0.337397
.br
Tonic[2]  major  0.506935     minor  0.535771
.br
Tonic[3]  major -0.404982     minor -0.720203
.br
Tonic[4]  major  0.0308014    minor  0.64007
.br
Tonic[5]  major  0.475928     minor -0.13113
.br
Tonic[6]  major -0.735928     minor -0.157988
.br
Tonic[7]  major  0.772586     minor  0.205276
.br
Tonic[8]  major -0.574103     minor -0.487743
.br
Tonic[9]  major  0.232566     minor  0.66303
.br
Tonic[10] major -0.014411     minor -0.625767
.br
Tonic[11] major -0.334105     minor  0.319835
.br
Estimated key: C major  (r=0.7917)   confidence:   5.7%
.in -2
The
.B "-a"
option causes the tonic major and minor correlations to be
printed for each pitch-class.
Good key matches have a high positive correlation;
the maximum value is 1.0.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the above sample output, notice that the confidence score for the
predicted key of C major (Tonic[0]) is quite low.
The reason for this is that the correlation coefficient for A minor
(Tonic[9]) is rather close to that for C major (0.791744 versus 0.66303)
Note that confidence scores may be used as a simple index
for estimating the tonal ambiguity or degree of chromaticism for a passage.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1), \fB**semits\fR (2),
\fBsemits\fR (1), \fBtimebase\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "WARNINGS"
.in +2
As noted,
.B "key"
is very limited.
When used to find \(odthe key\(cd of a particular work,
it frequently produces incorrect results.
In particular, for much tonal music,
.B "key"
has a tendency to mistakenly identify the dominant of the
key rather than the tonic.
See also the discussion under \(odproposed modifications.\(cd
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "BUGS"
.in +2
The current version does not handle multiple stops in
**kern
spines.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "NOTES"
.in +2
Currently the program is sensitive to
**semits
and
**kern
interpretations.
If no recognizable interpretation is
given in the input stream,
.B "key"
assumes
**kern
compatible input.
This may lead to erroneous results.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "REFERENCES"
.in +2
Krumhansl, C.
.I "Cognitive Foundations of Musical Pitch,"
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1990, Chapter 4.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Krumhansl, C. L. & Kessler, E. J.
\(odTracing the dynamic changes in perceived tonal organization in a spatial
representation of musical keys,\(cd
.I "Psychological Review,"
Vol. 89 (1982) pp.334-368.
.in -2
