\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH melac 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBmelac\fR  --  calculate melodic accent values for successive pitches in a Humdrum input
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBmelac\fR  [\fIinputfile.sem\fR ...]  [> \fIoutputfile.tac\fR]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "melac"
command accepts as input Humdrum
**semits
data and outputs a series of values representing the degree of melodic
accent associated with each note.
Melodic accent values vary between 0 (no accent)
and 1 (maximum accent).
Input is limited to only a single
**semits
data spine.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "melac"
command implements a model of melodic accent developed by Joseph Thomassen
(see \s-1REFERENCES\s+1).
Thomassen's model is sensitive to pitch contour only -- distinguishing
just three types of melodic motion:
ascending, descending, and unison.
The model calculates tonal accent values according to a moving 3-pitch window.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "melac"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.mac' extension.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "melac"
command provides only a help option:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the output of the
.B "melac"
command.
The \f(CR**semits\fR spine is the input, and the \f(CR**melac\fR
spine is the corresponding output.
(A \f(CR**kern\fR equivalent to \f(CR**semits\fR has been added
to increase the readability.)
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
**kern	**semits	**melac
16ee	16	1
16cc	12	0.5
16b	11	0.355
16cc	12	0.2407
16g	7	0.1207
16cc	12	0.2407
16b	11	0.1207
16cc	12	0.0957
16ff	17	0.5561
16cc	12	0.085
16b	11	0.355
16cc	12	0.2407
16a	9	0.1207
16cc	12	0.2407
16b	11	0.1207
16cc	12	0.29
*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "LIMITS"
.in +2
This command is currently able to handle only a single (monophonic)
input stream.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "REFERENCES"
.in +2
Joseph Thomassen,
\(odMelodic accent: Experiments and a tentative model,\(cd
.I "Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,"
Vol. 71, No. 6 (1982) pp.1598-1605;
see also, Erratum,
.I "Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,"
Vol. 73, No. 1 (1983) p.373.
.in -2
