\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH midi 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBmidi\fR  -- convert from \f(CR**kern\fR to Humdrum \f(CR**MIDI\fR format
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBmidi\fR  [\fB-Ccu\fR]  [\fB-d \fIn\fR]  [\fB-q \fIn\fR]  [\fIinputfile.krn\fR ...]  [ > \fIoutputfile.hmd\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "midi"
command converts Humdrum \f(CR**kern\fR data into Humdrum \f(CR**MIDI\fR data.
Humdrum \f(CR**MIDI\fR data may be played by the
.B "perform"
command or converted to a standard MIDI file using the
.B "smf"
command.
The
.B "midi"
command will translate all \f(CR**kern\fR spines in the input
stream into \f(CR**MIDI\fR data,
and will echo any non-kern spines.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "midi"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.hmd' extension
(`Humdrum midi').
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "midi"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-c\fR	echo all data records as global comments (prior to the
	  data record)
\fB-C\fR	echo all data records as global comments (following the
	  data record)
\fB-d \fIn\fR	assigns a note-duration of \fIn\fR \f(CR**recip\fR value to
	  all pitches and rests
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-q \fIn\fR	set number of MIDI clock ticks per quarter-duration to \fIn\fR
\fB-u\fR	suppress the deletion of duplicate (unison) concurrent
	  note-on instructions
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
If the
.B "-c"
option (`comment') is invoked, all data records are echoed as global
comments in addition to the usual processing.
This option is useful in conjunction with the
.B "perform"
command;
.B "perform"
echoes all global comments while playing MIDI inputs,
and so the comment option allows the user to view the original \f(CR**kern\fR
score while the music is performed.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The \fB-d \fIn\fR option allows the user to reassign all the durations
of all notes and rests in a given input.
The value \fIn\fR is specified in
reciprocal duration notation (\f(CR**recip\fR), where `4' represents
a quarter-duration, `2.' represents a dotted half-duration, `12'
represents a quarter-note triplet, `0' represents a breve, etc.
(See \f(CR**recip\fR in Section 2 for details.)
With the
.B "-d"
option all pitches and rests in the input will be assigned the specified
duration value -- whether or not the notes already have encoded durations.
This option is useful for such tasks as proof-listening to passages
containing especially short notes, or auditing works --
such as Gregorian chant -- where durations have not been encoded
or are suspect for other reasons.
Note that the
.B "-d"
option should be used only in the case of monophonic inputs, or multi-part
inputs that contain strictly isochronous chords.
Polyphonic inputs containing non-isochronous durations will cause a
loss of synchronization between the parts.
The resulting output is apt to cause serious problems with commands
such as
.B "perform"
and
.B "smf."
.sp 1
.sp 1
In contrast to MIDI performance data, canonical musical scores
(such as \f(CR**kern\fR) frequently contain unisons -- where two
voices share the same pitch for a period of time.
MIDI produces a `note-off' instruction at the end of each note; however
only a single `note-off' instruction is required to turn-off a note.
Unfortunately, the first note-off will terminate a note -- even if
the same pitch is sustained in another voice.
In normal operation,
.B "midi"
suppresses the sending of the first of two MIDI `note-off' commands when
a unison is encountered in the input.
This ensures that the pitch will be sustained for the longer of the
unison durations.
This feature can be disabled by invoking the
.B "-u"
option.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "midi"
command assigns a default duration of 72 MIDI clock-ticks per quarter-note.
This default value may be reassigned using the
\fB-q \fIn\fR option.
The value \fIn\fR should be chosen so that all canonical durations
present in a given score divide evenly into it.
For example, the default value of 72 clock-ticks per quarter-note,
means that eighth-notes and sixteenth-notes will have durations of
36 and 18 clock-ticks respectively.
Eighth-note triplets and sixteenth-note triplets will have durations
of 24 and 12 clock-ticks respectively.
Thirty-second notes will have a duration of 9 clock-ticks.
But sixty-fourth notes can cause synchronization problems since they
do not divide evenly into 72.
The user may wish to reassign this value depending on the types of
canonical durations present in a given input.
Changing the default number of clock-ticks will affect the tempo
of performance when using the
.B "perform"
command.
Hence, it may be necessary to revise the tempo indication of a resulting
Humdrum midi-format file.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following examples illustrate how
.B "midi"
may be invoked.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
midi chopin > chopin.hmd
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
converts the \f(CR**kern\fR data from the file \f(CRchopin\fR to
\f(CR**MIDI\fR data in the file \f(CRchopin.hmd\fR.
The command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
midi -c siegfrd.idl > siegfrd.hmd
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
translates the \f(CR**kern\fR data from the file \f(CRsiegfrd.idl\fR
to \f(CR**MIDI\fR data in the file \f(CRsiegfrd.hmd\fR and echoes
all \f(CR**kern\fR data as global comments.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SAMPLE OUTPUTS"
.in +2
The operation of
.B "midi"
is illustrated in the following inputs and outputs.
In the first example, a simple C major scale is encoded in \f(CR**kern\fR.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
!! midi example #1
**kern
*M2/4
*C:
\(eq1
8c
8r
8d
8e
\(eq2
8f
8g
8a
8b
\(eq3
4cc
4r
====
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Executing the
.B "midi"
command with the default settings results in the \f(CR**MIDI\fR
output given below.
Notice that a default channel of MIDI channel 1 has been assigned
via the tandem interpretation \f(CR*Ch1\fR.
Note also that each \f(CR**kern\fR note has resulted in two MIDI instructions:
\(odkey-on\(cd and \(odkey-off\(cd.
Since the end of one note coincides with the start of the subsequent
note, key-on and key-off data are output as Humdrum double-stops
(two tokens separated by a single space character).
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
!! midi example #1
**MIDI
*Ch1
*M2/4
*C:
\(eq1
72/60/64
36/-60/64
36/62/64
36/-62/64 36/64/64
\(eq2
36/-64/64 36/65/64
36/-65/64 36/67/64
36/-67/64 36/69/64
36/-69/64 36/71/64
\(eq3
36/-71/64 36/72/64
72/-72/64
====
\.
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
\f(CR**MIDI\fR data consist of three numbers separated by slashes (/).
The first integer represents the number of clock ticks that must elapse
from the previous instruction before the current event is initiated.
In the above case, a default value of 72 clock ticks per quarter-note
has resulted in 36 clock ticks for each eighth note.
The second integer represents the MIDI key number, where middle C is
represented as key #60 (negative numbers denote key-off instructions).
The third integer represents the MIDI key velocity.
The default key velocity is 64 units.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The second example illustrates the handling of input containing multiple-stops.
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l l.
!! midi example #2
**harm	**kern
*	*Ch3
\(eq1	\(eq1
I	4c 4e 4g
IV	4c 4f 4a
V	4d 4g 4b
I	4e 4g 4cc
==	==
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
The output below is generated by invoking the following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
midi -c input > output
.in -2
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l l.
!! midi example #2
**harm	**MIDI
*	*Ch1
!!**harm	**kern
*	*Ch3
!!*	*Ch3
\(eq1	\(eq1
!!=1	=1
I	0/60/64 0/64/64 0/67/64
!!I	4c 4e 4g
IV	96/-60/64 96/-64/64 96/-67/64 96/60/64 96/65/64 96/69/64
!!IV	4c 4f 4a
V	96/-60/64 96/-65/64 96/-69/64 96/62/64 96/67/64 96/71/64
!!V	4d 4g 4b
I	96/-62/64 96/-67/64 96/-71/64 96/64/64 96/67/64 96/72/64
!!I	4e 4g 4cc
==	==
!!==	==
\.	96/-64/64 96/-67/64 96/-72/64
*-	*-
!!*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that non-kern data (\f(CR**harm\fR) is echoed in the output.
Also, notice that each input record has been reproduced as a global
comment (preceded by !!).
This feature is useful in conjunction with the
.B "perform"
command.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
.in +2
The
.B "midi"
command echoes tempo indications for the benefit of the
.B "perform"
command.
If a tempo range is specified (e.g. MM92-98),
.B "midi"
calculates the average range and echoes that (MM95).
Tempo terms (such as \(odlargo\(cd) are not handled by
.B "midi."
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in -2
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBhumdrum\fR (1), \fB**kern\fR (2),
\fBkern\fR (1), \fB**MIDI\fR (2), \fBperform\fR (1),
\fBproof\fR (1), \fBsmf\fR (1), \fBtacet\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PROPOSED MODIFICATIONS"
.in +2
Channel assigment tandem interpretations (e.g. \f(CR*Ch6\fR) should
be recognized in the input stream and cause the default channel 1 output
to be suppressed.
.in -2
