\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH nf 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +8
.ti -8
\fBnf\fR  --  determine normal form for successive vertical sonorities in Humdrum inputs
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBnf\fR  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [> \fIoutputfile.nf\fR]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "nf"
command is used to determine the
.I "normal form"
for any of five set-theory related inputs:
pitch (\f(CR**semits\fR), pitch-class (\f(CR**pc\fR),
prime form (\f(CR**pf\fR), interval-vector (\f(CR**iv\fR),
or Fortean set name (\f(CR**pcset\fR).
.sp 1
.sp 1
\(odNormal form\(cd is a standardized way of representing the pitch material
for any arbitrary set of pitches.
Normal form provides the most intervallically compact spelling of the
pitch-classes evident in a given sonority.
It is analogous to rearranging notes in a chord so that the
spelling is in root position,
close position, with duplicate pitch-classes eliminated.
By way of example, a D major chord (in any inversion,
with any spelling) will have the normal form: 2,6,9 -- namely,
the pitch-classes D, F#, A (as opposed to 6,9,2 or 2,9,6).
See \s-1REFERENCES\s+1 below.
.sp 1
.sp 1
When provided with \f(CR**semits\fR or \f(CR**pc\fR inputs,
.B "nf"
treats each input record as a set of pitches.
Unisons and other pitch-class duplications have no effect on the output.
Rests within a set of pitches are ignored;
where an input record consists solely of one or more
rests, a null-token is output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "nf"
command is able to translate any of the representations listed below.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**nf\fR) refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "nf"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.nf' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**iv\fR	interval vector representation
\f(CR**nf\fR	normal form representation
\f(CR**pc\fR	pitch-class representation
\f(CR**pcset\fR	Fortean pitch-class set name
\f(CR**pf\fR	prime form representation
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 12 = C5)
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBnf\fR."
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "nf"
command provides only a help option:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following command outputs the normal form for the sets
formed by successive sonorities in the input file \f(CRopus24\fR.
The input may be pitches, pitch-classes, Fortean set names, etc.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
nf opus24 > opus24.nf
.in -2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcontext\fR (1), \fB**iv\fR (2), \fBiv\fR (1),
\fB**nf\fR (2),
\fB**pc\fR (2), \fBpc\fR (1),
\fB**pcset\fR (2), \fBpcset\fR (1),
\fB**pf\fR (2), \fBpf\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fBsemits\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "NOTE"
.in +2
The
.B "nf"
command is a shell script that invokes
\f(CRpcset -n\fR.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "REFERENCES"
.in +2
Allen Forte,
.I "The Structure of Atonal Music."
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973.
.sp 1
.sp 1
John Rahn,
.I "Basic Atonal Theory."
New York: Longman Inc., 1980.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Straus, J.
.I "Introduction to Post-Tonal Theory."
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1990.
.in -2
