\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH pc 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +8
.ti -8
\fBpc\fR  --  translate Humdrum semitone representation or pc to pitch-class
.in -8
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBpc\fR  [\fB-atx\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [ > \fIoutputfile.pc\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "pc"
command transforms various pitch-related inputs to
corresponding numerical pitch-class equivalents:
C=0, C-sharp/D-flat=1, D=2, . . . B=11.
It outputs one or more Humdrum \f(CR**pc\fR
spines containing pitch-class values corresponding to
each of the input pitch tokens.
For example, the \f(CR**semits\fR
token \(od\(mi13\(cd is transformed to 11 (pc).
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "pc"
command is able to translate any of the pitch-related
representations listed below.
In each case, a tuning standard of A4 equals 440 hertz is assumed.
For descriptions of the input and output representations
refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "pc"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.pc' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**cents\fR	hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 1200 equals C5)
\f(CR**freq\fR	fundamental frequency (in hertz)
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**pc\fR	pitch-class representation
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	  (e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**specC\fR	spectral centroid (in hertz)
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBpc\fR."
Note that the
.B "pc"
command is also able to reprocess pitch-class (\f(CR**pc\fR) inputs.
This allows pitch-class representations to be translated from
numeric-only (0,1,2,3 ... 9,10,11) to mixed alphanumeric
(0,1,2,3 ... 9,A,B) or vice versa.
(See documentation for \f(CR**pc (2)\fR.)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "pc"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-a\fR	output alphanumeric representation (where A=10, B=11)
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-t\fR	suppresses printing of all but the first note of a
	  group of tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes
\fB-x\fR	suppresses printing of non-pitch-class data
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-a"
option invokes an alternative (alphanumeric) form of the \f(CR**pc\fR
output where the upper-case letters `A' and `B' are substituted for the
pitch-class integers 10 and 11, respectively.
In addition, the input alias values `T' (ten) and `E' (eleven) are transformed
to `A' and `B'.
Encodings using mixed alphanumeric values are often better
suited to pattern-matching and searching tasks.
Encodings using purely numeric values are especially useful when the
representation is to be processed numerically.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-t"
option ensures that only a single output value is given for
tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes;
the output coincides with the first note of the tie.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that
.B "pc"
will round-off frequencies and non-integer semitone input values
to the nearest pitch-class.
Hence, an input \f(CR**semits\fR
data token of 5.6 will be rendered in the \f(CR**pc\fR
output as the value 6.
Similarly, the input \f(CR**freq\fR value 452.1 will be rendered in the
\f(CR**pc\fR output as the value 9.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the default operation,
.B "pc"
outputs non-pitch-related signifiers in addition to the pitch-class value.
For example, the \f(CR**semits\fR token \(odX15yz\(cd will result in the output
\(odX3yz\(cd -- that is, after translating 15 to pitch-class 3,
the \(odXyz\(cd signifiers are retained in the output.
The
.B "-x"
option is useful for eliminating non-pitch-class-related signifiers
from the output.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the use of
.B "pc."
The input contains four spines -- one of which
(\f(CR**foo\fR) cannot be processed by
.B "pc."
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l
l l l l.
!! `pc' example.
**semits	**kern	**pc	**foo
*M2/4	*M2/4	*	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	.
8x	8ee-	abc9 xyz10	A
\.	.	BCD	A
#18@	8ff	.	B
23.1 -16	8dd-	.	B
(-2)	8d-	8 7.	C
-12...	.	0.8	C
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	D
[3.0abc19	[4a-	(2) 3	D
&]	4a-]	6&?	E
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	E
r	2r	5 4	.
===	==	====	.
*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Executing the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
pc -xt input > output.pc
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following result:
.sp 1
.TS
l s s s l l l
l l l l l l l.
!! `pc' example.
**pc		**pc		**pc		**foo
*M2/4		*M2/4		*		*
\(eq1		\(eq1		\(eq1		.
8		3		9 10		A
\.		.		B		A
6		5		.		B
11 8		1		.		B
10		1		8 7		C
0		.		0		C
\(eq2		\(eq2		\(eq2		D
3		8		2 3		D
\.		.		6		E
\(eq3		\(eq3		\(eq3		E
r		r		5 4		.
===		==		====		.
*-		*-		*-		*-
.TE
.sp 1
Both processed and unprocessed spines are output.
Notice that the \f(CR**pc\fR
value `B' in the token `BCD' has been maintained in the first measure.
Notice that for the data tokens in the first spine of measure 2,
only the first numerical value in the input data tokens is processed.
More than one numerical value is output only if the input token
is truly a multiple-stop (as in the third spine of measure 1).
Also notice that the tied note in the second spine at the beginning of measure 2
has been rendered as a single value `8'
(due to the
.B "-t"
option).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "FILES"
.in +2
The file
.I "x_option.awk"
is used by this program when the
.B "-x"
option is invoked.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**cents\fR (2), \fBcents\fR (1),
\fB**freq\fR (2), \fBfreq\fR (1),
\fB**iv\fR (2), \fBiv\fR (1),
\fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1),
.br
\fB**nf\fR (2), \fBnf\fR (1),
\fB**pc\fR (2),
\fB**pcset\fR (2), \fBpcset\fR (1),
\fB**pf\fR (2), \fBpf\fR (1),
\fB**pitch\fR (2), \fBpitch\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fBsemits\fR (1),
\fB**solfg\fR (2), \fBsolfg\fR (1),
\fB**specC\fR (2) \fBspecC\fR (1),
\fB**Tonh\fR (2), \fBtonh\fR (1)
.in -2
