\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH pcset 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBpcset\fR  --  convert Humdrum pitch and pitch-class information to set-theoretic representations
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBpcset\fR  [\fB-c\fR]  [\fB-n\fR|\fBp\fR|\fBv\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "pcset"
command is used to generate and convert between various
set-theoretic representations.
.sp 1
.sp 1
By default, the output is the Fortean pitch-class set type (\f(CR**pcset\fR).
Alternatively, the user may choose to output the corresponding
.I "normal form"
(\f(CR**nf\fR) or the more succinct
.I "prime form"
(\f(CR**pf\fR) or the associated
.I "interval vector"
(\f(CR**iv\fR).
See \s-1REFERENCES\s+1 below.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In addition to accepting \f(CR**semits\fR or \f(CR**pc\fR inputs,
.B "pcset"
can also process \f(CR**nf\fR, \f(CR**iv\fR,
\f(CR**pf\fR or \f(CR**pcset\fR inputs.
This permits the user to determine the normal form, prime form or
interval vector for a given pc-set, or the interval vector for a given
pc-set, prime form, or normal form, etc.
.sp 1
.sp 1
For all of the above translations,
.B "pcset"
also provides a
.I "complementation"
operator, where output values corresponding to the pitch-class set complement.
For example, when the complementation option is invoked,
an input consisting of the pitch-classes (0,4,7,10)
would produce an output pertinent to the complementary set (1,2,3,5,6,8,9,11).
Complementation can be applied to any accepted input type,
including normal form, prime form, interval vector, and pc-set.
Note that if the input consists of all twelve pitch-classes,
.B "pcset"
produces a null token as the set complement.
.sp 1
.sp 1
When provided with \f(CR**semits\fR or \f(CR**pc\fR inputs,
.B "pcset"
treats each input record as a set of pitches.
Unisons and other pitch-class duplications have no effect on the output.
Rests within a set of pitches are ignored;
where an input record consists solely of one or more
rests, a null-token is output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "pcset"
command is able to translate any of the representations listed below.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**pcset\fR) refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "pcset"
command should be given names with the distinguishing
extensions `.pcs', `.nf' `.pf' or `.iv' -- depending on the
selected option.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**iv\fR	interval vector representation
\f(CR**nf\fR	normal form for pitch-class sets
\f(CR**pc\fR	pitch-class representation
\f(CR**pcset\fR	Fortean pitch-class set name
\f(CR**pf\fR	prime form representation
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 12 = C5)
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBpcset\fR."
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "pcset"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-c\fR	generate output for set complement
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-n\fR	output normal form (\f(CR**nf\fR) spine
\fB-p\fR	output prime form (\f(CR**pf\fR) spine
\fB-v\fR	output interval vector (\f(CR**iv\fR) spine
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
By default, the
.B "pcset"
command outputs a \f(CR**pcset\fR representation.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-n"
option causes
.B "pcset"
to output normal form (\f(CR**nf\fR) data instead of \f(CR**pcset\fR data.
\(odNormal form\(cd is a standard way of representing the interval
structure of any arbitrary set of pitch-classes.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-p"
option causes
.B "pcset"
to output the prime form (\f(CR**pf\fR) for the input.
Prime form is analogous to rearranging notes in a chord so that
the spelling is in root position,
close position, transposed so that the root of the chord is C.
By way of example, any major chord (having any root, in any inversion,
with any spelling) will have the normal form: 0,4,7 -- namely, a given
(basic) pitch, plus a pitch 4 semitones above than the basic pitch,
plus a pitch 7 semitones above the basic pitch.
(See \s-1REFERENCES\s+1.)
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-v"
option causes interval vector information (\f(CR**iv\fR) to be output
rather than \f(CR**pcset\fR data.
All pitch-class sets can be characterized according to the possible
interval-classes that can be constructed.
The six-element interval-vector specifies the abundance
of various interval-classes from 1 semitone to 6 semitones.
(See \s-1REFERENCES\s+1.)
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that the
.B "iv"
command, the
.B "nf"
command, and the
.B "pf"
command are aliases for
\f(CRpcset -v\fR,
\f(CRpcset -n\fR and
\f(CRpcset -p\fR respectively.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following command outputs the interval vectors for the sets
formed by successive sonorities in the input file \f(CRwebern\fR:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
pcset -v webern > webern.iv
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The following command outputs the Fortean set type for the complement
of the sonorities given in the input file \f(CRberg\fR:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
pcset -c berg > berg.pcs
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The following command outputs the normal form representation
for sets formed from successive
sonorities in the input file \f(CRboulez\fR:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
pcset -n boulez.nf
.in -2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcontext\fR (1), \fB**iv\fR (2), \fBiv\fR (1),
\fB**nf\fR (2), \fBnf\fR (1),
\fB**pc\fR (2), \fBpc\fR (1),
\fB**pcset\fR (2),
\fB**pf\fR (2), \fBpf\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fBsemits\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "REFERENCES"
.in +2
Allen Forte,
.I "The Structure of Atonal Music."
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1973.
.sp 1
.sp 1
John Rahn,
.I "Basic Atonal Theory."
New York: Longman Inc., 1980.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Straus, J.
.I "Introduction to Post-Tonal Theory."
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1990.
.in -2
