\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH proof 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +12
.ti -12
\fBproof\fR  --  check syntax of Humdrum \f(CR**kern\fR file
.in -12
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBproof\fR  [\fB-w\fR]  [\fIinputfile.krn\fR ...]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "proof"
command checks the syntax of \f(CR**kern\fR-encoded files.
It may be used to assist in the detection
and correction of \f(CR**kern\fR encoding errors.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "proof"
command scans the input stream for ten types of errors:
(1) consistency of incremented measure numbers, and measure-number agreement
between concurrent parts,
(2) incoherent pitch tokens (such as assigning two pitches to the same note),
(3) incoherent durations (such as assigning two durations to the same note),
(4) notes that have simultaneous sharp and flat accidentals,
(5) repeat encodings of trills, mordents, inverted mordents, ties, pauses,
staccato markings, and natural signs,
(6) consistent phrase markings (e.g. `{' must precede and be
matched with `}' etc. with the exception of elisions (&)),
(7) consistent slur markings (e.g. `(' must precede and be
matched with `)' etc. with the exception of elisions (&)),
(8) tied notes which differ in pitch or pitch spelling,
(9) unequal total durations for each voice within a measure, and
(10) the presence of multiple-stops that do not share the same duration.
In addition,
.B "proof"
issues a number of warnings of possible data errors:
(11) warn of files which do not end with a double barline,
(12) warn of material encoded following a double barline,
(13) warn of measures which change meters unannounced,
(14) warn of the presence of identical material in consecutive measures,
(15) warn of the presence of pitches which are encoded without
an accidental -- where the same pitch had previously received an
accidental in the same measure, and
(16) warn of the absence of meter, tempo, key, and key signature declarations.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "proof"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-w\fR	suppress output of warnings
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-w"
option causes all warnings to be suppressed;
only \f(CR**kern\fR error messages are output.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DIAGNOSTICS"
.in +2
The following list tabulates all of the potential errors and warnings
issued by the
.B "proof"
command.
.sp 1
.TS
l.
\f(CRError: Incoherent key signature, line \fIn\f(CR: assigned more than
         one accidental to the same pitch.
Error: Inconsistent barline indication across spines at line \fIn\f(CR.
Error: Timing error in measure \fIx\f(CR, spine \fIy\f(CR, at line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Double stops at line \fIx\f(CR in spine \fIn\f(CR do not have same duration.
Error: Unmatched ties in spine \fIn\f(CR.
Error: Incorrect pitch specification in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect duration specification in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect accidental specification in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect ornament specification in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Tie must begin on valid kern note, spine \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect tie encoding in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Tied notes inconsistent in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect tie specification in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect tie in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect slur, spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect slur specification in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect phrase marking in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Incorrect phrase specification in spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Error: Only one pause permitted in data token. Spine \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Warning: No double barline in input.
Warning: No meter declaration for spine \fIn\f(CR.
Warning: No tempo declaration for spine \fIn\f(CR.
Warning: No key declaration for spine \fIn\f(CR.
Warning: No key signature declaration for spine \fIn\f(CR.
Warning: Measure \fIn\f(CR may be out of place near line \fIn\f(CR
Warning: Material follows after double barline at line \fIn\f(CR
Warning: Measure \fIj\f(CR identical to measure \fIk\f(CR at line \fIn\f(CR
Warning: Possible change of meter in measure \fIx\f(CR, line \fIn\f(CR
Warning: Accidental may be missing in m.\fIx\f(CR, spine \fIy\f(CR, at line \fIn\f(CR
Warning: No double barline in input.
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Potential errors and warnings issued by \fBproof\fR."
.in -2
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcensus\fR (1),
\fBencode\fR (1), \fBhumdrum\fR (1), \fB**kern\fR (2)
.in -2
