\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH rend 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +10
.ti -10
\fBrend\fR  --  split data tokens from specified Humdrum spines into component sub-tokens
.in -10
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +8
.ti -8
\fBrend\fR  [\fB-s\fR]  \fB-i  '\fItarget_interp\fB'  -f  \fIreassign-file\fR  [\fIinputfile ...\fR]
.in -8
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "rend"
command breaks apart data tokens from selected input spines into 
one or more sub-tokens distributed across one or more newly created
output spines.
The user specifies which input spine or spines are to be split.
The manner in which the signifiers are to be distributed is specified
in a separate
.I "reassignment"
file.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Humdrum data tokens often contain more than one type of information
or type of signfier.
For example, the
**pitch
representation consists of three parts:\(dg
.FS \(dg
Not including cents deviation.
.FE
the pitch letter name, the accidental, and the octave number (e.g. A#4).
In some tasks it may be useful to split such information into separate spines.
For example, a user may wish to reformat the following spine:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l.
**pitch
Ab3
Eb4
F#4
C5
*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
as three independent spines:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l.
**octave	**note	**accidental
3	Ab	b
4	Eb	b
4	F#	#
5	C	.
*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
The
.B "rend"
command allows each occurrence of a target exclusive interpretation to be
replaced by specified output spines.
The user selects how the signfiers (characters) in the
input spines are to be distributed to the replacement output spines.
Signifiers (ASCII characters) are identified using \s-1UNIX\s+1
regular expression syntax (see \fBregexp (6)\fR).
.sp 1
.sp 1
The above transformation may be achieved by invoking the following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
rend -i '**pitch' -f reassign
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The \fB-i\fR option specifies the target input interpretation, i.e.,
the input spine(s) to be processed.
The \fB-f\fR option specifies a reassignment-file
(named \f(CRreassign\fR) containing the following records:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
**octave	[0-9]
**note	[A-Gb#x]+
**accidental	[b#x]+
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Reassignment files consist of one or more records, each containing two
strings separated by a tab.
The left-most string identifies the name of the new spine to be generated.
The right-most string defines an associated regular expression.
Any input signifiers matching the regular expression will be echoed as output
in the associated spine.
In the above case, all numbers are echoed in the first spine
(\f(CR**octave\fR),
all letters plus the sharp (#) and flat (b) signs are echoed in the
second spine (\f(CR**note\fR), whereas only sharp and flat signs are
echoed in the third spine (\f(CR**accidental\fR).
The order of the output spines preserves the order of the assignments
in the reassignment file.
In the above case, for example, the order of the output spines will be
**octave, **note, **accidental
for each input spine labelled
**pitch.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "rend"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-f \fIreassign\fR	maps input tokens to output tokens according
	  to definitions given in the file \fIreassign\fR
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the
	  command syntax
\fB-i \fItarget_interp\fR	process all input spines whose exclusive
	  interpretations are labelled \fItarget_interp\fR
\fB-s\fR	matches a single instance of the given pattern
	  rather than all instances
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
.sp 1
.sp 1
Consider the following example:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
rend -i '**kern' -f noterest song01
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
and the associate reassignment file named \f(CRnoterest\fR:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
**notes	[]A-Ga-g[#-]+|^=+[0-9]*
.br
**rests	[\\.0-9r]+|^=+[0-9]*
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
This command specifies that each
**kern
spine in the file
song01
is to be split into two new spines dubbed
**notes
and
**rests.
The first regular expression -- \f(CR'[]A-Ga-g[#-]+|^=+[0-9]*'\fR --
indicates that the following strings should be echoed in the
data records for \f(CR**notes\fR:
the upper-case letters \f(CRA\fR to \f(CRG\fR
and the lower-case letters \f(CRa\fR to \f(CRg\fR,
plus the characters \f(CR[, ], #\fR, and \f(CR-\fR.
Alternatively,
.B "rend"
will echo any data token beginning with one or more equals-signs,
followed by zero or more numbers.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Similarly, the second
**rests
spine will contain characters that match the regular
expression '[\\.0-9r]+|^+=[0-9]*'.
This includes the period (.), all numbers (0-9), plus the letter
.I "r."
Alternatively,
.B "rend"
will echo any data token beginning with one or more equals-signs,
followed by zero or more numbers.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Given this command, the following input:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l
l s s
l l l.
**kern	**lyrics	**kern
!! Commented input.
8.G	Hi-	4r
16G#	de-	.
\(eq23	\(eq23	\(eq23
8A	ho-	2r
[8c	.	.
8c]	.	.
16r	.	.
16A	.	.
\(eq24	\(eq24	\(eq24
2C 2E	hum.	2r
===	===	===
*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
will produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l l l
l s s s s
l l l l l.
**notes	**rests	**lyrics	**notes	**rests
!! Commented input.
G	8.	Hi-	.	4r
G#	16	de-	.	.
\(eq23	\(eq23	\(eq23	\(eq23	\(eq23
A	8	ho-	.	2r
[c	8	.	.	.
c]	8	.	.	.
\.	16r	.	.	.
A	16	.	.	.
\(eq24	\(eq24	\(eq24	\(eq24	\(eq24
C E	2 2	hum.	.	2r
===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that
.B "rend"
correctly handles Humdrum multiple-stops (such as \f(CR2C 2E\fR).
Notice also that if no match is made, a null token (.) is output.
.in -2
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcleave\fR (1), \fBextract\fR (1),
\fBhumsed\fR (1), \fBrecode\fR (1), \fBregexp\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "WARNINGS"
.in +2
Note that, apart from spine-path terminators, no other spine-path
indicators are permitted in spines containing
the target interpretation.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "BUGS"
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
If the interpretation targetted for processing appears in a
spine starting with a different interpretation, the output will
fail to generate the proper spine terminator and add-spine
path indicators.
The result is a non-Humdrum file.
Consider the following command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
rend -i '**ex1' -f reassign input
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
and the associate reassignment file (\f(CRreassign\fR):
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
**let	[a-z]
.br
**num	[0-9]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
Given the following input:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
**ex1	**ex2
a1	b2
*tand1	*tand2
c3	d4
*	**ex1
e5	f6
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
the corresponding output is given below.
Note the absence of appropriate spine-path indicators
between lines 4 and 5 (hence the output is non-Humdrum).
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l l.
**let	**num	**ex2
a	1	b2
*tand1	*tand1	*tand2
c	3	d4
*	*	**let	**num
e	5	f	6
*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
.in -2
