\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH scramble 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +14
.ti -14
\fBscramble\fR  --  randomize order of either Humdrum data records or data tokens
.in-14
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBscramble\fR   \fB-r\fR   [\fB-s \fIregexp\fR]   [\fIinputfile\fR]
.br
\fBscramble\fR   \fB-t\fR   [\fB-m\fR]   [\fB-s \fIregexp\fR]   [\fIinputfile\fR]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "scramble"
command can be used to randomize either the order of Humdrum data records
or the arrangement of data tokens within each data record.
The
.B "scramble"
command is useful for generating control data when testing
contextual relationships between signifiers.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Two modes of operation are supported according to whether the
\fB-r\fR (record) or \fB-t\fR (token) option is invoked.
When the \fB-r\fR mode is selected, the order of data records
is randomized.
In this mode, each output record is identical to some input record;
only the order of the output records is changed.
When the \fB-t\fR mode is selected, the order of data tokens within
each record is randomized.
In this mode, the order of the input records is preserved --
however, data tokens between concurrent spines are randomly swapped.
The \fB-t\fR mode will also cause sub-tokens within
multiple stops to be rearranged within the data token.
However, if the
.B "-m"
option is concurrently invoked,
then sub-tokens within multiple-stops will be randomly
redistributed across all tokens in the record.
The
.B "-r"
and
.B "-t"
options cannot be invoked concurrently.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In both modes of operation, Humdrum comments and interpretations
remain unaffected.
Comments and interpretations are output intact, and in precisely
the same location (line number) as in the input.
Only data records are affected by
.B "scramble."
.sp 1
.sp 1
Each time
.B "scramble"
is invoked, a different random ordering is generated.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that when using the \fB-r\fR mode,
the scrambling process may produce an output that is no longer
syntactically correct Humdrum.
With the \fB-r\fR mode,
.B "scramble"
is guaranteed to produce Humdrum output only if (1) the input file
is bona fide Humdrum, and (2) the number of spines in the input does not vary.
.sp 1
.sp 1
With the \fB-t\fR mode,
.B "scramble"
will always produce output conforming to the Humdrum syntax,
however it can produce uninterpretable output if concurrent spines do not
contain the same type of data (i.e. have the same exclusive interpretations).
.sp 1
.sp 1
Notice also that reordering data records may destroy data-token links
such as
**kern
ties.
.sp 1
.sp 1
A skip option (\fB-s\fR) permits users to anchor certain data records
so that they are not either repositioned, or their data tokens rearranged.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "scramble"
command provides the following option:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the
	  command syntax
\fB-m\fR	redistribute subtokens in multiple stops across
	  all tokens in the record; used in conjunction
	  with \fB-t\fR only
\fB-r\fR	scramble the order of data records; don't scramble
	  data tokens
\fB-s \fIregexp\fR	skip; don't scramble records matching \fIregexp\fR; leave
	  matching records intact, and in the same position
\fB-t\fR	scramble data tokens within each record; don't
	  scramble record order
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
One of either the
.I "record mode"
(\fB-r\fR) or
.I "token mode"
(\fB-t\fR) must be invoked.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The use of the
.B "scramble"
command can be illustrated using the following input:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l s
l l.
!! A global comment
!! Another comment
**inter	**inter
*abcd	*efgh
\(eq1	\(eq1
1a 1b	a
!local	!local
2	b1 b2 b3
3	c
\(eq2	\(eq2
.T&
l s
l l.
!! A later comment.
4a 4b	d
\(eq3	\(eq3
5	e
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
When processed using the
.I "record mode,"
the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
scramble -r -s = inputfile
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
might produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l s
l l.
!! A global comment
!! Another comment
**inter	**inter
*abcd	*efgh
\(eq1	\(eq1
3	c
!local	!local
5	e
1a 1b	a
\(eq2	\(eq2
.T&
l s
l l.
!! A later comment.
4a 4b	d
\(eq3	\(eq3
2	b1 b2 b3
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
In this example, notice that the Humdrum comments and interpretations
remain in their original location; only the data records have
been reordered.
In addition, data records containing an equals-sign have been
frozen in their original locations.
.sp 1
.sp 1
When processed using the
.I "token mode,"
the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
scramble -t -m -s = inputfile
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
might produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s
l s
l l.
!! A global comment
!! Another comment
**inter	**inter
*abcd	*efgh
\(eq1	\(eq1
1b	a 1a
!local	!local
b2	b3 2 b1
c	3
\(eq2	\(eq2
.T&
l s
l l.
!! A later comment.
4a 4b	d
\(eq3	\(eq3
5	e
*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
Notice that a complete scrambling of data tokens within a Humdrum file
cannot be achieved merely by invoking one
.B "scramble"
mode followed by the other mode.
In order to completely scramble a Humdrum file the user must
extract and scramble the record order for each spine independently,
and then reassemble the scrambled spines into a new file using the
.B "assemble"
command.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note also that where the number of spines changes over the course
of the input file, valid Humdrum output is unlikely.
Outputs consistent with the Humdrum syntax can be ensured by using the
.B "fields -i"
command to chronicle changing numbers of spines in a file,
followed by the
.B "yank"
command to segregate data blocks containing the same number of spines.
Each such bock can be \fBscramble\fRd independently and then the
blocks reconnected using the \s-1UNIX\s+1
.B "cat"
command.
Unnecessary (duplicate) interpretations can be eliminated using
.B "rid -u."
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBassemble\fR (1),
\fBextract\fR (1),
\fBfields\fR (1),
\fBhumdrum\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "WARNINGS"
.in +2
If the number of spines changes over the course of the input
file, valid Humdrum output is unlikely when using the
.B "-r"
option.
Note also that reordering data records or data tokens
will destroy data-token links such as
**kern
\(odties.\(cd
Use of the \fB-t\fR mode,
can produce uninterpretable output when concurrent spines do not
contain the same interpretations.
.in -2
