\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH semits 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +12
.ti -12
\fBsemits\fR  --  translate selected Humdrum pitch-related representations to numerical semitones
.in -12
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +10
.ti -10
\fBsemits\fR  [\fB-p \fIn\fR]  [\fB-tx\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [ > \fIoutputfile.sem\fR]
.in -10
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "semits"
command transforms various pitch-related inputs to corresponding
numerical semitone values.
It outputs one or more Humdrum \f(CR**semits\fR
spines containing values corresponding to the semitone distance
from middle C for pitch-related input tokens.
Pitches above middle C produce positive output values,
whereas pitches below middle C produce negative output values.
For example, the \f(CR**pitch\fR
token \(odC3\(cd is transformed to \(mi12 (semits).
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "semits"
command is able to translate any of the pitch-related
representations listed below.
In each case, a tuning standard of A4 equals 440 hertz is assumed.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**semits\fR) refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "semits"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.sem' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**cents\fR	hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 1200 equals C5)
\f(CR**freq\fR	fundamental frequency (in hertz)
\f(CR**fret\fR	fretted-instrument pitch tablature
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**MIDI\fR	Music Instrument Digital Interface tablature
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	  (e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**specC\fR	spectral centroid (in hertz)
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBsemits\fR."
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "semits"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the
	  command syntax
\fB-p \fIn\fR	output precision of \fIn\fR decimal places
\fB-t\fR	suppresses printing of all but the first note of
	  a group of tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes
\fB-x\fR	suppresses printing of non-semits data
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-p"
option can be used to set the precision of the output values to \fIn\fR
decimal places.
The default precision is integer values only.
Note that
.B "semits"
is able to process \f(CR**semits\fR
as input; this feature allows the user to round-off existing \f(CR**semits\fR
data to a specified precision.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-t"
ensures that only a single output value is given for tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes;
the output coincides with the first note of the tie.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the default operation,
.B "semits"
outputs non-pitch-related signifiers in addition to the semits value.
For example, the \f(CR**pitch\fR
token \(odA5zzz\(cd will result in the output
\(od21zzz\(cd -- that is, after translating A5 to 21 semits,
the \(odzzz\(cd signifiers are retained in the output.
For some applications, echoing non-pitch-related signifiers in the output
is useful.
However, in other situations, the result can prove confusing --
especially, when the non-pitch-related signifiers are numbers.
Consider the case of the \f(CR**kern\fR token \(od8aa\(cd;
after translating `aa' to 21 semits, the non-pitch-related signifier `8'
will also be output, hence the value 821 -- which will undoubtedly cause
confusion.
The
.B "-x"
option is useful for eliminating non-pitch-related signifiers from the output.
For most \f(CR**kern\fR inputs, the
.B "-x"
option is recommended.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the use of
.B "semits."
The input contains six pitch-related spines
-- two of which (\f(CR**deg\fR and \f(CR**cocho\fR) cannot be processed by
.B "semits."
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `semits' example.
**kern	**pitch	**MIDI	**deg	**cocho	**Tonh
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
8ee-	G#4foo	/60/bar	1foo	r	Gis2
\.	.	/-60/	.	.	.
8ff	A3	/62/	2	9.89	H2
\.	.	/-62/	.	.	.
8dd-	Ab3	/70/	1	7.07	B2
\.	.	/-70/	.	.	.
8d-	C#4	/61/	6	7.135	Cis4
\.	.	/-61/	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
[4a-	r	.	5	r	r
\.	.	.	7	5.5	Heses2
4a-]	D4	/48/ /52/	1	8.11	C3
\.	.	/-48/	.	.	.
\.	D4 F4	/-52/	2	7.33 6.4	C3 Es3
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	G4	.	r	r	H2 D3
===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Executing the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
semits -tx input > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following result:
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l l l.
!! `semits' example.
**semits	**semits	**semits	**deg	**cocho	**semits
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
15	8	0	1foo	r	-16
\.	.	.	.	.	.
17	-3	2	2	9.89	-13
\.	.	.	.	.	.
13	-4	10	1	7.07	-14
\.	.	.	.	.	.
1	1	1	6	7.135	1
\.	.	.	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
8	r	.	5	r	r
\.	.	.	7	5.5	-15
\.	2	-12 -8	1	8.11	-12
\.	.	.	.	.	.
\.	2 5	.	2	7.33 6.4	-12 -9
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	7	.	r	r	-13 -10
===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Both processed and unprocessed spines are output.
Notice that the tied note at the beginning of measure 2 in the \f(CR**kern\fR
spine has been rendered as a single note rather than as two notes
(due to the
.B "-t"
option).
Also notice that the non-pitch-related signifiers (e.g. foo)
in the first notes of the \f(CR**pitch, **MIDI\fR, and \f(CR**cocho\fR
spines have been stripped away (due to the
.B "-x"
option).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "FILES"
.in +2
The file \f(CRx_option.awk\fR
is used by this program when the
.B "-x"
option is invoked.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**cents\fR (2), \fBcents\fR (1),
\fB**freq\fR (2), \fBfreq\fR (1),
\fB**fret\fR (2), \fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1),\fR \fB**MIDI\fR (2),
\fBmidi\fR (1),
\fB**pitch\fR (2), \fBpitch\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fB**solfg\fR (2), \fBsolfg\fR (1),
\fB**specC\fR (2) \fBspecC\fR (1),
\fB**Tonh\fR (2), \fBtonh\fR (1)
.in -2
