\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH solfg 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBsolfg\fR  --  translate selected Humdrum pitch-related representations to French solf\o'e\(ga'ge notation
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBsolfg\fR  [\fB-tx\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [ > \fIoutputfile.slg\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "solfg"
command transforms various pitch-related inputs to the corresponding
French system for designating pitches.
It outputs one or more Humdrum \f(CR**solfg\fR spines.
French pitch designations use the so-called \(odfixed-doh\(cd system,
where:
.I "do, r\o'e\(aa', mi, fa, sol, la,"
and
.I "si"
correspond to
.I "C, D, E, F, G, A,"
and
.I "B."
In \f(CR**solfg\fR, flats
.I "(b\o'e\(aa'mol)"
and sharps
.I "(di\o'e\(ga'se)"
are abbreviated
.I "b"
and
.I "d"
respectively.
Hence, `do di\o'e\(ga'se'
(do~d)
for C sharp, `la b\o'e\(aa'mol'
(la~b)
for A flat, `sol double-di\o'e\(ga'se'
(sol~dd)
for G double-sharp, `si double-b\o'e\(aa'mol'
(si~bb)
for B double-flat, and so on.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "solfg"
command is able to translate any of the pitch-related
representations listed below.
In each case, a tuning standard of A4 equals 440 hertz is assumed.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**solfg\fR) refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "solfg"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.slg' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**cents\fR	hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
\f(CR**degree\fR	key-related scale degree
\f(CR**freq\fR	fundamental frequency (in hertz)
\f(CR**fret\fR	fretted-instrument pitch tablature
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**MIDI\fR	Music Instrument Digital Interface tablature
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	  (e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 12 = C5)
\f(CR**specC\fR	spectral centroid (in hertz)
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBsolfg\fR."
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "solfg"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-t\fR	suppresses printing of all but the first note of a
	  group of tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes
\fB-x\fR	suppresses printing of non-solfg data
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-t"
ensures that only a single output value is given for tied \f(CR**kern\fR notes;
the output coincides with the first note of the tie.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the default operation,
.B "solfg"
outputs non-pitch-related signifiers in addition to the solfg value.
For example, the \f(CR**pitch\fR
token \(odGb5zzz\(cd will result in the output
\(odsol~b5zzz\(cd -- that is, after translating Gb5 to sol~b5,
the \(odzzz\(cd signifiers are retained in the output.
For some applications, echoing non-pitch-related signifiers in the output
is useful.
However, in other situations, the result can prove confusing --
especially, when the non-pitch-related signifiers are numbers.
Consider the case of the \f(CR**kern\fR token \(od8aa#\(cd;
after translating `aa#' to la~d5, the non-pitch-related signifier `8'
will also be output, hence the value 8la~d5 -- which may cause
confusion.
Commands such as
.B "pitch"
and
.B "solfg"
treat the first number encountered in an input token
as the octave designation.
So further processing of this token may lead to it's interpretation as A#8
-- or even A#85 -- rather than A#5.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-x"
option is useful for eliminating non-pitch-related signifiers from the output.
For most \f(CR**kern\fR inputs, the
.B "-x"
option is recommended.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the use of
.B "solfg."
The input contains six pitch-related spines --
two of which (\f(CR**deg\fR and \f(CR**cocho\fR) cannot be processed by
.B "solfg."
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `solfg' example.
**kern	**pitch	**MIDI	**deg	**cocho	**degree
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*	*d:
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
8ee-	G#4foo	/60/bar	1foo	r	1/4
\.	.	/-60/	.	.	.
8ff	A3	/62/	2	9.89	2/4
\.	.	/-62/	.	.	.
8dd-	Ab3	/70/	1	7.07	3+/4
\.	.	/-70/	.	.	.
8d-	C#4	/61/	6	7.135	7/3
\.	.	/-61/	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
[4a-	r	.	5	r	r
\.	.	.	7	5.5	1/4
4a-]	D4	/48/ /52/	1	8.11	6+/4
\.	.	/-48/	.	.	.
\.	D4 F4	/-52/	2	7.33 6.4	3/4 5/4
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	G4	.	r	r	3/4 1/5
===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Executing the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
solfg -tx input > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following result:
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `solfg' example.
**solfg	**solfg	**solfg	**deg	**cocho	**solfg
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*	*	*	*	*	*d:
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
mi~b5	sol~d4	do4	1foo	r	re4
\.	.	.	.	.	.
fa5	la3	re4	2	9.89	mi4
\.	.	.	.	.	.
re~b5	la~b3	si~b4	1	7.07	fa~d4
\.	.	.	.	.	.
re~b4	do~d4	re~b4	6	7.135	do~d3
\.	.	.	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
la~b4	r	.	5	r	r
\.	.	.	7	5.5	re4
\.	re4	do3 mi3	1	8.11	si4
\.	.	.	.	.	.
\.	re4 fa4	.	2	7.33 6.4	fa4 la4
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	sol4	.	r	r	fa4 re5
===	===	===	===	===	===
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Both processed and unprocessed spines are output.
Notice that the tied note at the beginning of measure 2 in the \f(CR**kern\fR
spine has been rendered as a single note rather than as two notes
(due to the
.B "-t"
option).
Also notice that the non-pitch-related signifiers (e.g. foo)
in the first notes of the \f(CR**pitch, **MIDI\fR, and \f(CR**cocho\fR
spines have been stripped away (due to the
.B "-x"
option).
In the case of the \f(CR**degree\fR input,
.B "solfg"
recognizes the spelling of various pitches in the context of the key of
D minor.
Hence, the raised third degree is \f(CRfa~d\fR (F#),
and the raised sixth degree is \f(CRsi\fR (B natural).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "FILES"
.in +2
The file \f(CRx_option.awk\fR
is used by this program when the
.B "-x"
option is invoked.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**cents\fR (2), \fBcents\fR (1),
\fB**degree\fR (2), \fBdegree\fR (1),
\fB**freq\fR (2), \fBfreq\fR (1),
\fB**fret\fR (2), \fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1),\fR \fB**MIDI\fR (2),
\fBmidi\fR (1), \fBmint\fR (1),
\fB**pitch\fR (2), \fBpitch\fR (1),
\fB**semits\fR (2), \fBsemits\fR (1),
\fB**solfg\fR (2), \fB**specC\fR (2), \fBspecc\fR (1),
\fB**Tonh\fR (2), \fBtonh\fR (1)
.in -2
