\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH solfa 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBsolfa\fR  --  translate selected Humdrum pitch-related representations to tonic solfa syllables (\f(CR**solfa\fR)
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBsolfa\fR  [\fB-tx\fR]  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [> \fIoutputfile.sol\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "solfa"
command transforms various pitch-related inputs to the corresponding
tonic solfa syllables.
The command outputs one or more Humdrum \f(CR**solfa\fR
spines -- where pitches are designated by the syllables
.I "do, re, mi, fa, so, la,"
and \fIti\fR -- or their chromatic alterations:
.I "di, da, ri, ra,"
etc. (see below).
Tonic solfa syllables can be determined only with reference to some
prevailing key.
For example, the pitch C is the tonic (\f(CRdo\fR) in the key of C major,
but the mediant (\f(CRmi\fR) in the key of A-flat major.
The
.B "solfa"
command expects a tandem interpretation indicating the key of the input passage;
.B "solfa"
will adapt to specified changes of key within an input stream.
If no key information is provided prior to the first pitch-related data,
.B "solfa"
issues an error message and terminates.
.sp 1
.sp 1
There are various systems for extending the tonic solfa syllables
in order to representing chromatic alterations.
The system used by
.B "solfa"
is tabulated below.
(Pronunciations are indicated in parentheses.)
.in -2
.sp 1
.TS
center;
l l l.
\fBbasic	\fBraised	\fBlowered\fR

do (\fIdoe\fR)	di (\fIdee\fR)	de (\fIday\fR)
re (\fIray\fR)	ri (\fIree\fR)	ra (\fIraw\fR)
mi (\fIme\fR)	my (\fImy\fR)	me (\fImay\fR)
fa (\fIfah\fR)	fi (\fIfee\fR)	fe (\fIfay\fR)
so (\fIso\fR)	si (\fIsee\fR)	se (\fIsay\fR)
la (\fIla\fR)	li (\fIlee\fR)	le (\fIlay\fR)
ti (\fItee\fR)	ty (\fItie\fR)	te (\fItay\fR)
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Summary of \fBsolfa\fI Signifiers"
.in +2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "solfa"
command differs from the
.B "deg"
and
.B "degree"
commands in that pitches are represented without regard to major or minor
.I "mode."
For example,
in the key of C major,
.B "deg"
and
.B "degree"
will characterize A-flat as a lowered sixth scale degree,
whereas the same pitch will be a normal sixth scale degree in the
key of C minor.
In the case of \fBBsolfa\fR, the A-flat will be characterized as \f(CRle\fR
-- whether or not the key is C major or C minor.
As in the case of
.B "deg"
and
\fBdegree\fR,
the amount of chromatic alteration is not represented;
once a pitch is \(odraised,\(cd raising it further will not
change the output representation.
For example, where the tonic pitch is B-flat, both B-natural
and B-sharp are represented by \f(CRdi\fR.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "solfa"
command is able to translate any of the pitch-related
representations listed below.
For descriptions of the various input representations
(including \f(CR**solfa\fR) refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced by the
.B "solfa"
command should be given names with the distinguishing .sol extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	  (e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBsolfa\fR."
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in -2
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "solfa"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-t\fR	suppresses printing of all but the first note of a
	  group of tied notes
\fB-x\fR	suppresses printing of non-\f(CR**solfa\fR signifiers
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-t"
option ensures that only a single output value is given for tied notes;
the output coincides with the first note of the tie.
.sp 1
.sp 1
In the default operation,
.B "solfa"
outputs non-pitch-related signifiers in addition to the degree value.
For example, in the key of D, the \f(CR**kern\fR
token \(od4Gz\(cd
will result in the output \(od4faz\(cd -- that is, after translating
G to fa, the \(od4...z\(cd signifiers are retained in the output.
For some applications, echoing non-pitch-related signifiers in the output
is useful.
However, in other situations, the result can prove confusing.
The
.B "-x"
option is useful for eliminating non-pitch-related signifiers from the output.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the use of
.B "solfa."
The input contains four pitch-related spines -- one of which (\f(CR**MIDI\fR)
cannot be processed by
.B "solfa."
In addition, there is one non-pitch-related spines (\f(CR**embell\fR).
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `solfa' example.
**kern	**Tonh	**MIDI	**solfg	**pitch	**embell
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*C:	*d:	*G#:	*a:	*F:	*F:
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
8ee-	Gis2	/60/	do3	F4foo	ct
\.	.	/-60/	.	.	.
8f	H2	/62/	fa3	G4bar	upt
\.	.	/-62/	.	.	.
8dd-	B2	/70/	mi3	E4	ct
\.	.	/-70/	.	.	.
8d--	Cis4	/61/	r	F4	sus
\.	.	/-61/	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
[4a-	r	.	mi_b3	F4 A4	.
\.	Heses2	.	re3	G4 Bb4	ct
4a-]	C3	/48/ /52/	do3	E4 C5	ct
\.	.	/-48/	.	.	.
\.	H2 E3	/-52/	la3	G4	ct
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	A2 F3	.	r	F4	.
==	==	==	==	==	==
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Executing the command:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
solfa -tx input > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
produces the following result:
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l l
l l l l l l.
!! `solfa' example.
**solfa	**solfa	**MIDI	**solfa	**solfa	**embell
*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4
*C:	*d:	*G#:	*a:	*F:	*F:
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
me	fi	/60/	me	do	ct
\.	.	/-60/	.	.	.
fa	la	/62/	le	r	upt
\.	.	/-62/	.	.	.
ra	le	/70/	so	ti	ct
\.	.	/-70/	.	.	.
ra	ti	/61/	r	do	sus
\.	.	/-61/	.	.	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
le	r	.	so	do mi	.
\.	le	.	fa	re fa	ct
\.	te	/48/ /52/	me	ti so	ct
\.	.	/-48/	.	.	.
\.	la re	/-52/	do	re	ct
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
r	so me	.	r	do	.
==	==	==	==	==	==
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
Both processed and unprocessed spines are output.
Notice that the tied note at the beginning of measure 2 in the \f(CR**kern\fR
spine has been rendered as a single note rather than as two notes
(due to the
.B "-t"
option).
Also notice that the non-pitch-related signifiers (e.g. foo)
in the first notes of the \f(CR**pitch\fR spine have been
stripped away (due to the
.B "-x"
option).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "FILES"
.in +2
The file \f(CRx_option.awk\fR
is used by this program when the
.B "-x"
option is invoked.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fB**deg\fR (2), \fBdeg\fR (1),
\fB**degree\fR (2), \fBdegree\fR (1),
\fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1),
\fB**pitch\fR (2), \fBpitch\fR (1),
\fB**solfa\fR (2),
\fB**solfg\fR (2), \fBsolfg\fR (1),
\fB**Tonh\fR (2), \fBtonh\fR (1)
.in -2
