\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH synco 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBsynco\fR  --  measure degree of metric syncopation for Humdrum input
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +7
.ti -7
\fBsynco\fR  [\fB-e\fR]  [\fIinputfile ...\fR]  [ > \fIoutputfile.syn\fR]
.in -7
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "synco"
command characterizes the degree of metric syncopation evident at
successive moments in a passage.
It outputs a single Humdrum spine (\f(CR**synco\fR) containing numerical
values representing the instantaneous level of syncopation.
The
.B "synco"
command requires at least two spines of input data -- one of which must be
**metpos.
(The \f(CR**metpos\fR representation encodes the position in the metric
hierarchy for each data record in the input.)
The other input spine(s) must contain information that implicitly or explicitly
encodes the occurrence of note onsets.
Appropriate inputs to
.B "synco"
include the pitch-related representations listed below.
For descriptions of the various input representations
refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**cbr\fR	critical band rate (in equivalent rectangular
	  bandwidths)
\f(CR**cents\fR	hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
\f(CR**cocho\fR	cochlear coordinates (in millimeters)
\f(CR**deg\fR	key-related relative scale degree
\f(CR**degree\fR	key-related absolute scale degree
\f(CR**freq\fR	fundamental frequency (in hertz)
\f(CR**fret\fR	fretted-instrument pitch tablature
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**MIDI\fR	Music Instrument Digital Interface tablature
\f(CR**pc\fR	pitch class
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	  (e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 12 = C5)
\f(CR**solfa\fR	tonic solfa syllables
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**specC\fR	spectral centroid (in hertz)
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBsynco\fR."
.sp 1
.sp 1
The resulting \f(CR**synco\fR
spine contains numerical values, where zero represents no metric syncopation
and successively increasing values represent increasing amounts of
metric syncopation.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "synco"
command implements a definition of metric syncopation inspired by the
work of Lee and Longuet-Higgins (see REFERENCES).
In brief, metric syncopation may be defined as a moment where an expected
metric stress is absent.
More specifically, a metrically syncopated moment is defined as occurring
when no note-onset happens at a moment whose metric position is more
important than that of the most recent note onset.
For example, where a note onset occurs on the second beat of a quadruple meter,
and is not followed by a note onset on the third beat, the third beat is
deemed metrically syncopated because it occupies a higher metric position than
the previous onset.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The numerical output values generated by
.B "synco"
are calculated as the logarithm
of the metric position of the previous onset minus the logarithm
of the metric position of the current moment -- where the
current moment has no note onset, and coincides with a higher
metric position than the previous onset.
The use of the logarithmic difference weights the output values
so that missing downbeats at the beginning of a measure produce a greater
metric syncopation value than lesser beats or sub-beats in the measure.
In addition, metric syncopation is greater when the difference in
metric position between the previous onset and the current moment
is greatest.
(See EXAMPLES.)
.sp 1
.sp 1
If more than one musical part is given as input,
.B "synco"
responds to the
.I "aggregate"
rhythmic structure -- as though all of the parts were amalgamated
into a single rhythmic stream.
By itself, a single musical part may evoke considerable metric syncopation,
but in combination with other parts, metrically syncopated
moments are typically fewer.
In short, running
.B "synco"
on a multi-part score normally produces different results from running
.B "synco"
on each part individually.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.B "synco"
monitors the input in order to determine the Humdrum
.I "time-base"
-- if encoded.
Specifically,
.B "synco"
checks to ensure that the time-base is not excessively short.
It is possible to have time-base values that exceed the temporal resolving
power of human listeners.
For example, if an onset appears a thirty-second duration
prior to an expected down-beat, listeners are apt to hear the
displaced onset as occurring
.B "on"
the beat rather than being a very short syncopation.
\(odExcessively short\(cd is operationally defined as a time-base
resolution shorter than a sixteenth note.
In such cases,
.B "synco"
issues a warning, noting that the time-base may be too short.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that only one metrically syncopated moment can happen following a
given note onset;
subsequent syncopated moments require the intervention of another note onset.
By way of example, a note occurring immediately prior to an absent
major downbeat, will not also cause syncopated moments to arise
for other beats within a measure containing only rests.
In short, two metrically syncopated moments can't occur without some note
onset intervening.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "synco"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.syn' extension.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "synco"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-e\fR	echo the input in the output
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
If the
.B "-e"
option is invoked, the output will echo all of the input spines along
with the \f(CR**synco\fR output.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following two examples illustrate the use of
.B "synco."
In both examples, the left-most spines represent the input,
and the right-most spine (labelled \f(CR**synco\fR) represents
the corresponding output.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The first example shows the minimum input of a single \f(CR**pitch\fR
input plus the metric position information (\f(CR**metpos\fR).
The meter signature is 2/4 and the time-base is an eighth duration.
(See the
.B "timebase (1)"
command.)
Hence there are 4 data records per measure.
The first beat in each measure is assigned the metric position "1";
the second beat is assigned the metric position "2";
and the second half of each beat is assigned the metric position "3".
Zero values in the \f(CR**synco\fR spine indicate the absence of any
syncopation.
In measure 3, a single syncopated moment happens at beat 2.
The output was produced using the simple command: \f(CRsynco inputfile\fR.
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s
l l l.
!! Example #1
**pitch	**metpos	**synco
*M2/4	*M2/4	*
*tb8	*tb8	*tb8
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1
r	1	0
\.	3	0
r	2	0
A4	3	0
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2
G4	1	0
\.	3	0
B4	2	0
r	3	0
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3
C5	1	0
C5	3	0
\.	2	0.41
B4	3	0
\(eq4	\(eq4	\(eq4
*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
In the following example, two metrically syncopated moments are
evident.
Notice that the rhythmic information for the two \f(CR**kern\fR
spines is amalgamated, and that the non-pitch spine (\f(CR**foo\fR)
has no affect on the processing.
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l s s l l
l l l l l.
!! Example #2
**foo	**kern	**metpos	**kern	**synco
*	*M2/4	*M2/4	*M2/4	*
*	*tb8	*tb8	*tb8	*tb8
A	=1	=1	=1	=1
A	4r	1	4r	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	.	3	.	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	8r	2	8r	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	[8a	3	[8a	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	=2	=2	=2	=2
A	4a]	1	8a]	1.10
A	.	4	.	0
A	.	3	8a	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	8b	2	8r	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	8r	3	8b	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	=3	=3	=3	=3
A	8cc	1	8cc	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	4.cc	3	4cc	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	.	2	.	0.41
A	.	4	.	0
A	.	3	8b	0
A	.	4	.	0
A	=4	=4	=4	=4
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
.in -2
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBmetpos\fR (1), \fB**synco\fR (2), \fBtimebase\fR (1), \fBurrhythm\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "REFERENCES"
.in +2
Longuet-Higgins, H. C., & Lee, C. S.
\(odThe perception of musical rhythms,\(cd
.I "Perception,"
Vol. 11 (1982) pp. 115-128.
.in -2
