\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH trans 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +11
.ti -11
\fBtrans\fR  --  transpose selected Humdrum pitch representations
.in -11
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
.in +9
.ti -9
\fBtrans  \fB-d\fR  [\fI\(+-\fR]\fIn\fR  [\fB-c\fR  [\fI\(+-\fR]\fIn\fR]  [\fIinputfile ...\fR]  [ > \fIoutputfile\fR]
.in -9
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "trans"
command is used to transpose various Humdrum pitch representations.
Transposed outputs maintain proper pitch-interval spellings,
except in modal transposition;
.B "trans"
might be used to transpose a work up a perfect fourth, or
down an augmented third, or from major mode to Phrygian.
A \(odtransposition interpretation\(cd is appended to the output
to mark the score as having been transposed.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "trans"
command is able to process those pitch-related representations listed below.
All other inputs are simply echoed in the output.
For descriptions of the various input representations
refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**kern\fR	core absolute pitch representation
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	  (e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBtrans\fR."
.sp 1
.sp 1
Transpositions are transformations that shift all
pitch-signifier values up or down by some amount.
Transpositions are specified by defining a
.I "diatonic offset"
and a
.I "chromatic offset."
The diatonic offset affects only the pitch-letter name used to spell a note.
The chromatic offset affects only the number of semitones shifted from
the original pitch height.
.sp 1
.sp 1
For typical transpositions, both diatonic and chromatic offsets will need
to be specified.
For example, in transposing up a minor third (e.g. from C to E-flat),
the diatonic offset is `up two pitch-letter names,' and the chromatic offset
is `up three semitones.'
The appropriate command invocation would be:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d +2 -c +3 input > output
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The plus signs above are optional; in their absence,
.B "trans"
assumes an upward transposition.
Note that negative offsets can be mixed with positive offsets.
For example,
trans -d -1 -c +1
will transpose the pitch C to B double-sharp, and F flat to E sharp, etc.
(i.e. down one letter name, yet up one semitone).
.sp 1
.sp 1
Modal transpositions are invoked by simply omitting the chromatic
offset information.
(See EXAMPLES below.)
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "trans"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.tr' extension.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "trans"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-c \fR[\fI\(+-\fR]\fIn\fR	transpose up(+) or down (-) \fIn\fR semitones
\fB-d \fR[\fI\(+-\fR]\fIn\fR	transpose up(+) or down (-) \fIn\fR diatonic letter names
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that the \fB-d\fR \(odoption\(cd is manditory rather than optional.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "EXAMPLES"
.in +2
The following examples illustrate the use of
.B "trans."
.sp 1
.sp 1
Transposition up a minor third differs from transposition up an augmented
second:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d +2 -c +3 milhaud
.br
trans -d +1 -c +3 milhaud
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
Enharmonic transpositions can be accomplished by defining the
chromatic offset as zero semitones.
For example, the following command transposes up a diminished second.
It might be used to transpose from the key of C-sharp to the key of D-flat.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d +1 -c 0 moonlight
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
Transposition up or down an octave requires both a diatonic offset
and a corresponding chromatic offset of plus or minus 12 semitones. e.g.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d -7 -c -12 guitar
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
In addition to exact pitch transpositions,
.B "trans"
can also perform
.I "modal"
transpositions.
Modal transpositions arise when the pitch letter names are modified
without regard for the precise semitone offset.
To invoke a modal transposition, simply omit the chromatic offset
specification.
The following transposition changes diatonic pitch-letter names (down by two
pitch-letters) so that the pitch C will become A, etc.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d -2 major > aeolian
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
For inputs in major keys, the corresponding outputs will be in Aeolian mode.
.sp 1
.sp 1
For some applications, two or more successive transpositions may be necessary.
For example, the following pipeline modifies inputs
in major keys so that they are in the tonic Dorian mode.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d +1 major | trans -d -1 -c -2 > dorian
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The first
.B "trans"
carries out a modal transposition -- up the interval of a diatonic second.
Thus, a work in D major would be placed in E Dorian.
The second
.B "trans"
returns the score down the precise interval of a major second.
Together, both transpositions would cause
an input in F major to be transformed to F Dorian;
an input in B-flat major would be transformed to B-flat Dorian, etc.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Whenever
.B "trans"
is invoked, it adds a tandem interpretation to the output indicating
that the output representation has been transposed and is no longer
at the original pitch.
.I "Transposition tandem interpretations"
are similar in syntax to the
.B "trans"
command itself.
For example, the following tandem interpretation indicates that
the score has been transposed up a major second.
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
*Trd1c2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
The tandem interpretation in effect echoes the operation
of the original transposition.
If a score has undergone more than one transposition,
the associated tandem interpretations will be ordered beginning with the most
recent transposition.
For example, a work that was transposed down a perfect
fourth, followed by up a diminished second:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d -3 -c -5
.br
trans -d +1 -c 0
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would contain the tandem interpretation:
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
*Trd1c0
.br
*Trd-3c-5
.in -2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SAMPLE OUTPUT"
.in +2
The following example illustrates the operation of
.B "trans."
Given the following input:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l l l.
**kern	**pitch	**Tonh	**solfg	**foo
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	.
c	C4	C4	do4	abc
c#	C#4	Cis4	do~d4	.
d-	Db4	Des4	re~b4	xyz
r	r	r	r	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	.
B-	Bb3	B3	si~b3	.
B--	Bbb3	Heses3	si~bb3	.
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	.
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
the command
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
trans -d 1 -c 2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
would produce the following output:
.in +2
.sp 1
.TS
l l l l l.
**kern	**pitch	**Tonh	**solfg	**foo
*Trd1c2	*Trd1c2	*Trd1c2	*Trd1c2	*
\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	\(eq1	.
d	D4	D4	re4	abc
d#	D#4	Dis4	re~d4	.
e-	Eb4	Es4	mi~b4	xyz
r	r	r	r	.
\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	\(eq2	.
c	C4	C4	do4	.
c-	Cb4	Ces4	do~b4	.
\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	\(eq3	.
*-	*-	*-	*-	*-
.TE
.sp 1
.in -2
.in -2
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBhumsed\fR (1), \fB**kern\fR (2), \fBkern\fR (1),
\fB**pitch\fR (2), \fBpitch\fR (1),
\fBrecode\fR (1),
\fB**solfg\fR (2),
.br
\fBsolfg\fR (1),
\fB**Tonh\fR (2), \fBtonh\fR (1)
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "WARNINGS"
.in +2
It is important not to confused transposed scores with notations of
music for transposing instruments
(such as the horn in F or the clarinet in B-flat).
The \f(CR**pitch, **kern, **Tonh\fR, and \f(CR**solfg\fR representations
are intended to represent absolute or concert pitch;
transposed scores are deviate from this convention.
The
.I "transpose tandem interpretation"
should not be used to indicate that an encoding is for a
transposing instrument.
A special tandem interpretation -- beginning
*ITr
-- is reserved for such designations.
The interpretation
*Tr
means that the encoding no longer represents absolute or concert pitch.
By contrast, the interpretation
*ITr
means that the instrumentalist reads from a score whose pitches are
notated differently from concert pitch;
nevertheless, the ensuing data is encoded at concert pitch.
For example, a trumpet in B-flat plays a B-flat by fingering the pitch C.
The absolute pitch (B-flat) is the proper \f(CR**kern, **pitch, **solfg\fR,
or \f(CR**Tonh\fR encoding.
Since the instrumentalist's
.I "notation"
is transposed up 1 diatonic letter-name and 2 chromatic semitones from
the absolute or concert pitch, the encoded score will contain the instrument's
transposition tandem interpretation
.sp 1
.sp 1
.in +2
*ITrd1c2
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
(even though the encoded data is at concert pitch).
Note that it is possible subsequently to transpose such a score using the
.B "trans"
command.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note also that key and key signature tandem interpretations are not modified by
.B "trans"
since \f(CR**pitch, **kern, **solfg\fR, and \f(CR**Tonh\fR,
intended to encode the original key and key signature at absolute pitch.
.in -2
