\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH veritas 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +13
.ti -13
\fBveritas\fR  --  validate that a Humdrum document has not been modified
.in -13
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBveritas\fR  [\fB-v\fR]  \fIinputfile\fR
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "veritas"
command provides an on-line means for formally or informally verifying
that a given Humdrum file originates with a given publisher or source,
or whether the file has been modified in some way.
The command provides a convenient way of reassuring scholars of
the accuracy or origin of a document.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "veritas"
command looks for a checksum validation number
encoded in a VTS reference record in the given input file.
(See the
.B "Reference Records (1)"
description.)
The command then calculates the checksum for the file
(excluding the VTS record itself) and compares this value with the
checksum encoded in the file.
If these values differ, a warning is issued that the file
has been modified in some way.
If these values are the same, a confirming message is issued.
.sp 1
.sp 1
Note that this verification process is easily circumvented by
malicious individuals.
For better security, the
.B "-v"
option should be invoked and the output checksum value should be
compared with an independent printed list of checksums provided by
the supplier of the electronic document.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "veritas"
command provides the following options:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
\fB-v\fR	invoke verbose mode
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "-v"
option will cause the checksum validation number to be output.
This value should be manually compared with a printed checksum
provided by the supplier of the electronic document.
Note that the change of even a single character in a file typically
leads to a radically different checksum.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and POSIX.2 compliant
.B "cksum"
command.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBcksum\fR (\s-1UNIX\s+1), \fBsum\fR (\s-1UNIX\s+1)
.in -2
