\"    This documentation is copyright 1994 David Huron.
.TH vox 1 "1994 Dec. 4"
.AT 3
.sp 2
.SH "NAME"
.in +2
.in +10
.ti -10
\fBvox\fR   --  determine number of simultaneously active pitches in a Humdrum input
.in -10
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SYNOPSIS"
.in +2
\fBvox\fR  [\fIinputfile\fR ...]  [ > \fIoutputfile.vox\fR]
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "DESCRIPTION"
.in +2
The
.B "vox"
command calculates the number of tones sounding together at
successive moments in time.
It outputs a single Humdrum spine (\f(CR**vox#\fR) where successive integers
indicate the total number of concurrently sounding pitches for each data record.
Multiple-stops are properly supported.
.sp 1
.sp 1
The
.B "vox"
command accepts as input any pitch-encoded Humdrum representations
listed below.
For descriptions of the various input representations refer to Section 2
.I "(Representation Reference)"
of this reference manual.
.sp 1
.sp 1
It is recommended that output files produced using the
.B "vox"
command should be given names with the distinguishing `.vox' extension.
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\f(CR**cbr\fR	critical band rate (in equivalent rectangular
	  bandwidths)
\f(CR**cents\fR	hundredths of a semitone with respect to middle C=0
	  (e.g. 1200 equals C5)
\f(CR**cocho\fR	cochlear coordinates (in millimeters)
\f(CR**deg\fR	key-related relative scale degree
\f(CR**degree\fR	key-related absolute scale degree
\f(CR**freq\fR	fundamental frequency (in hertz)
\f(CR**kern\fR	core pitch/duration representation
\f(CR**pc\fR	pitch class representation
\f(CR**pitch\fR	American National Standards Institute pitch notation
	  (e.g. \(odA#4\(cd)
\f(CR**semits\fR	equal-tempered semitones with respect to middle C=0
\f(CR**solfa\fR	tonic solfa syllables
\f(CR**solfg\fR	French solf\o'e\(ga'ge system (fixed `doh')
\f(CR**specC\fR	spectral centroid (in hertz)
\f(CR**Tonh\fR	German pitch system
.TE
.sp 1
.ce
.I "Input representations processed by \fBsemits\fR."
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "OPTIONS"
.in +2
The
.B "vox"
command provides only a help option:
.sp 1
.TS
l l.
\fB-h\fR	displays a help screen summarizing the command syntax
.TE
.sp 1
Options are specified in the command line.
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "PORTABILITY"
.in +2
\s-1DOS\s+1 2.0 and up, with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1OS/2\s+1 with the \s-1MKS\s+1 Toolkit.
\s-1UNIX\s+1 systems supporting the
.I "Korn"
shell or
.I "Bourne"
shell command interpreters, and revised
.I "awk"
(1985).
.in -2
.sp 1
.sp 1
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.in +2
\fBvox#\fR (2)
.in -2
